experiences that for that segment of the conspiracy theory population that is open to having their intel corrected that can actually help? And I think that is by and large, I think that Holocaust Education, in fact, educates and that a very large number of people will not become conspiracy theorists because of that education. And that brings us back to the question of, okay, at what point in their lives did they start believing crazy things? Did they stop having trust in science or having trust in historians or in academia or in scholarship or journalism or any of it? Did they simply cut themselves off from these things as a source of truth? And what can be done as intervention to help people realize that, hey, that connecting yourself to truth is actually a very, very vital life skill.

Come let us reason together. You see, this is where the reasoning happens. What should I do? Should I stay in bed and have another hour, or should I get out of bed right now? That influences whether we do the I will or the I won't. That's the way God planned it. Unfortunately, there are many things today that people are doing that are actually clouding, or compromising the path where our goals our, the part where our intellect, reason and judgment is. We've been looking at that this week, though, I actually haven't defined it as such.

in the United States has been highly charged and there's a lot of fracture in families and even friendships because of these divides. And so there's just been a lot of upheaval in our connectedness with each other. When I think about loneliness, I think of how close it is to depression. One of the reasons that I wanted to talk to you about this specifically is because of your research and your writing and your history with the perfectly hidden depression model, where you talk about people don't even realize that they have depression. Because loneliness so close to depression that people get the two conflated or confused and just help contribute to the fact that we're ignoring it because people have this, oh well, I'll just make friends and buck up mentality. Is there a correlation there?

thoughts. Is relationship OCD an actual subcategory of OCD? Yes, it is. It's a pretty popular one. A lot of people experience relationship OCD. And I will say I don't personally experience it anymore. I've been in a five year long, very stable, healthy relationship. But it was definitely difficult when I had to end things with someone because I would be like, I would have to just make up other excuses because I can't tell someone like, hey, I have to break up with you because 25 times a day, I think of it. It's about how I'm going to traumatize you or how I'm going to ruin your life. And I cannot do that to you so I need to remove myself from the situation. There's no way you can tell someone that doesn't have OCD or like a concept of an anxiety disorder. So it was very, very difficult.

refined sense of that stupid stuff that I was caring about doesn't matter anymore. Like, I don't have to say yes to every time I'm asked to take part in this thing in the community or this thing for a moment, whatever it is, I don't have to. I can say no because they now recognize their time is more important. The choices they want to make that align with their values. Same thing with the right people that you want in your life. Same thing with the activities you choose to take part in. Same thing with the goals you make a plan to pursue versus put on ice. To be honest, that just like that to me sounds a lot like the morgue. Right? Oh, yeah. Yeah. And it's an apt analogy. Put it on ice, right? So it really works. Now, all of this led you to create the astonishingly alive model for living.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total time:  14.370774984359741
