 It's a Latin phrase that means remember you must die. Yes. So it is not remembering we're going to die so that we can just be dour and have a really morbid conversation and talk about how, well, that sucks. I grew up in my mom's head a button that she wore on her lapel like on her ass to watch jacket, like, life sucks and then you die. We're not talking like that. No, this is about, remember that you're temporary so that it does help you to refine what your priorities are to feel a little bit more of that sense again of maybe that intensity and urgency. You're listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast where experts share experiences and the latest thinking on mental health and psychology. Here's your host Gabe Howard. Hey everyone, welcome to the show. I'm your host Gabe Howard. This podcast is sponsored by cornbread hemp.com. Save 30% on your first order using code inside 30. Calling in today we have Jody Wellman. Jody holds a master's of applied positive psychology from the University of Pennsylvania. And her TED talk, how death can bring you back to life has over 1.3 million views. Her book you only die once. How to make it to the end with no regrets is out now. Jody, welcome to the podcast. Oh, thanks Gabe. I am stoked to be here to spend this time with you. I've never heard anybody describe talking about death as stoked. I want to be really honest. We've done grief on this podcast before. We've not shied away from death, but it's always done sad. And your energy is really high end. You're like, yeah, let's talk about death. Yes. Yes. If I had, I call myself the Grimm Reaper's cheerleader. And I have no rhythm. I couldn't do a cheer to save my life. But I really want to get black pom-poms just for visual effects to be like. I love it. I love it. Be not afraid. He's here to actually be the right little kick in the butt we need. So yeah, oh yeah, I'm rarer and to go. Let's make this a little mortality party. No, no, when you say the Grimm Reaper is the kick in the butt that we need, it conjures up this idea that you're saying, wait, so the Grimm Reaper comes, takes you away. You're dead now and that's the kick in the butt you need, but that's not what you mean, right? Exactly. It would be the ultimate kick, not so fun, not so good, no pom-poms at that point. This is about ushering the Grimm Reaper into our lives now, being willing to talk about it and saying, wait a sec, if we do tune in to the unfortunate sucks to be true truth that we are temporary, could that be the thing that helps us snap out of this autopilot we're in and helps us stop taking life or granted and makes us go holy cowl. This really is a countdown, maybe I should get on with some of those ideas I have for my life. It'll we need that, right? One of the things that reminds me of is all of my projects that have deadlines get done. All of my projects that are like, I'm going to do this don't get done. I've been writing the same book for a decade. There's no deadline, there's nobody reaching over me, there's nobody telling me to finish it, there's no if you don't get it done by this date, a bad thing will happen. Is that what you mean? Gabe, you are on it right down to the language. You don't even know you said it, but when you said deadline, you're speaking my language because it is like, we need the ultimate, ultimate, ultimate deadline of life because we're procrastinating. Like this is the most meta procrastination that goes on is like, we lull ourselves into this idea that I'll have time later. And later to me is like, just the most dangerous word. And I recognize we have to pace ourselves. This is not about stuffing everything into this week. But you're right. We aren't aware of this sort of sense of finality. We do just tend to push out our existence. And that again is the danger because how many times have you said, well, first of all, you've got a book you've been kind of dragging out a little bit. I want to hear more about that. For a decade, for a decade, it's been dragging on forever. I got every excuse in the book, don't you worry. Oh, well, should we count how many Mondays you have left? Might that be this sort of poking the ribs maybe? Okay, let's talk about that. Do you use the phrase, should we count how many Mondays you have left? First of all, I want to count how many Fridays I have left. Fridays are just ways superior to Mondays, but it's not my thing. It's yours. So how many Mondays that what do you mean by that? I really know. Okay, well, we roughly get 4,000 to start with. That's like the average lifespan. And that's why I called my company 4,000 Mondays. There we go. Wow. And so when I look at this whole idea again, the science is called temporal scarcity. And that is this notion that whenever we recognize there is a thing, an experience, an item, a diamond, a pumpkin spice latte, whatever it is. When we know that it is limited, when we know that it won't be around forever, our perception of its value absolutely increases. And so that's exactly what we're doing with our lives. It's said, we say, wait a second, I've got 4,000 roughly to play with. I don't care so much about how many have used. I know. I was there. I did them. I want to know how many I have left because this taps into that sense of scarcity. And so for me, for example, it's 1,830 that I have left. And I count that every Monday, pretty darn vigilantly, because we need that extra reminder. And that's the thing that for many of us can be the provocation to say, oh, and let's recognize from like 1,830, I ain't going to be too sharp near the end of those. Right? So if I'm writing another book, I'm probably not going to bank on the best years of being, you know, I don't have that full runway. But that's the thing that can motivate us to get on with living with that sense of urgency and attention. Wow. When you said 1,800, I forget how many Mondays do you have left? 1,830. All I could think of is that's less than half. Like immediately I was like, oh no. Yes, thank you for that. That's very true. I'm on the downward slope. And another way to just rank a less, because I am here just to slightly rankle. Like I want us to experience a twinge of an existential crisis, but not like a full blown, you know. That's fair. That's fair. Thank you. Thank you. I can't handle a full blown. But I think a twinge is probably good for me. A twinge. Yeah, you have to pay extra for the full blown one. So that's not happening today. So this is like little, oh, another way to grip is when you count how many Mondays you have left in your career. So for some of us, that's like, please, that cannot come soon enough. You know, like, please tell me it's 19 Mondays left. And that's another story. It's like, let's maybe work on changing it so that you enjoy those Mondays. But for the rest of us who are generally maybe liking what we do and we're finding it kind of animating and invigorating, sometimes that can be another wake up call about, wait a minute. Like I think the last time I did it, I don't do this one regularly, but I think I counted and I'm not going to really get a retire. I mean, how can I stop doing this, right? The Grim Reaper is not stopping. He's not going to, he's not going to fire me. I think I had something like 642 and I remember doing that math and going, whoa, like that is not enough time to carry forth this mission that I feel called to do. And so sometimes these are the ways we can play with the math to help motivate us. Wow. So I need to figure out how many Mondays I have left. How do I do it? Okay. Well, first and foremost, the resources page on my website has a calculator because you do not have to spend your precious minutes doing math. But roughly, if you're a man, you'd start with 78 and minus your age. Okay. So I did multiply that by 52. Okay. So the first thing that I'm going to do is open up a calculator app. Yep. Okay. Because that's, that just seems the right idea. Yeah. Okay. So I take 78 minus your age. 47. So that gets me to 31. 52 weeks a year. Times 52 weeks a year, which is 1,612. How does it feel to see that number? Terrible because I also know that it's lower because I'm, this isn't my birthday, right? So my birthday is November 24. So when I factor in, you know, there's, there's another, oh, wow. There's another like, I mean, even if we just do like six months ago, I turned 47. So, you know, even if we just do half of a year, which is 26 weeks, I've got a minus that from that number. So I'm actually like to 1586. Yeah. Yeah. That's terrible. I've got no time left. Winsec has a book looking right now, Gabe. Yeah. It looks like I need to like write it immediately. Should we quit this conversation right now so you can go back to your draft? I mean, I feel urgency. I mean, I do feel urgency, but I also have so many more questions because this blows my mind. How does this not cause a panic? I'm, because I'm, as I'm sitting here, you know, like, like, like you said, you're, you're not trying to cause a full blow next to Central Crisis. Just, just, just trying to nudge me a little bit. But as I'm sitting here thinking, I'm like 1586, there's nothing left. There's no time. Oh my God. I've wasted everything and accomplished nothing. So I'm like teeter into the negative, but I've got you here. Push us back over to the positives. Yeah. I'm going to just like, come on back in. Let's have like a nice comforting hug. Most people, yes, your experience is normal, right? It's like, it's meant to make your eyes widen. But because this is not news, right? Like nobody here is experiencing new news today that your time is up. But we're just very used to talking about it in years. And even then, we do a very good job of not talking about it, which is really why, how we get ourselves to be honest into this mess of taking life or granted is that we prefer not to talk about it. We can talk about retirement as a fuzzy notion, but we don't want to talk about the end, but we understand that it's coming. I'm just making it more granular. And so for most of us, even though is it uncomfortable feeling and it can do that thing where it makes you feel like, wait a second, you took it to an interesting place too, which might be for dramatic effect, which I appreciate, was like, wait a second, I've wasted all my time. And that's where I like to play too. Because number one, I think the truth is, most of us are not going to jump off the edge because the math made it clear. It's like all we're doing is slicing and dicing it differently and trying to create a reaction, which is actually healthy. So appreciate any fear you're experiencing or anxiety. Yes, sit with it and embrace it. That's important is to soak that in. So you really embrace memento mori, which is, it's a philosophical thing, but it's a Latin phrase that means remember you must die. Yes. And in philosophy, it's like, remember you must die, so get busy living. It sounds like you embrace that on steroids. It is a little bit juiced up. Yeah. Exactly that. That is the ethos. So just to be super clear, it is not remembering we're going to die so that we can just be dour and have a really morbid conversation and talk about how well that sucks. You know, I grew up in my mom had a button that she wore on her lapel like on her ass to watch jacket and it was like, like, life short and then you die or like life sucks and then you die. Yeah. It doesn't have to be. Yeah. We're not talking like that. No, this is about remember that your temporary so that it does help you to refine what your priorities are and it does help you to feel a little bit more of that sense again of maybe that intensity and urgency to say, if I only have this much time, I'm going to make the decision that these things maybe are not as important and these things are more important and gave the best best scenario I see. This is one of the chapters in the book is about people who've had wake up calls and I don't know if you know anybody. Maybe, you know, people who have had a precipice moment like a brush with death near death experience, maybe it's a diagnosis that thankfully they're in remission for or not. They are, their eyes have been opened in ways that we just don't see the rest of our lives, right? Because they now know what they had to lose because they saw it and they're living lives and they, you know, there are so many lessons that are based in research, everything I like to talk about as much as I goof off. It's empirically based because that, you know, feels legit is that they have this refined sense of that stupid stuff that I was caring about doesn't matter anymore. Like, I don't have to say yes to every time I'm asked to take part in this thing in the community or this thing for a moment, whatever it is, I don't have to. I can say no because they now recognize their time is more important. The choices they want to make that align with their values. Same thing with the right people that you want in your life. Same thing with the activities you choose to take part in. Same thing with the goals you make a plan to pursue versus put on ice. To be honest, that just like that to me sounds a lot like the morgue. Right? Oh, yeah. Yeah. And it's an apt analogy. Put it on ice, right? So it really works. Now, all of this led you to create the astonishingly alive model for living. Can you share that with our audience? Well, thank you, first of all, for dredging that puppy up. I love it. This to me is where the nerd factor gets explosionary and I love it. It's a framework for looking at our lives. So I look at life like, yeah, we want to live longer, sure, of course. But most of us would agree that it's not about the length because it's like, well, what's the quality of my life? So now we've got a different demogod, the dimension of living wider and deeper. And you live wider when you add more vitality into your life. And that's the fun stuff. It's like the traditional definition of happiness. It's going out and going to the new restaurant or going on that cool road trip, having fun, having a party, playing a game. It's the good fun stuff. Like, yes, check, I want it. So that's wider with vitality. And then there's living deeper with meaning. And that is just a tad more about doing good, rather than feeling good, it has to do with having a sense of meaning and purpose, connection. Maybe it's spirituality, but it's like quality relationships like the depth of life, you know? And when you just put that stuff together, anytime you are plus on vitality on the scale, and anytime you're plus on meaning on the scale, you're in the quadrant, which is like our mecca for life, which is living astonishingly alive lives. And it doesn't need to be flashy or showy, you know, it doesn't have to mean that you're like glitzy and like going on South of France trips and you've got the best of everything and the best band bag or whatever. I don't know, who cares? Your version of an astonishingly alive life could be just beautifully sweet and simple, or it could be, it could be flashy. That's fine. If that's you, flash it up. Whatever floats your boat, but we just always to ourselves to look at our lives and go, wait a minute. How am I doing on vitality? Do I need more of that? And or how am I doing on meaning? Do I want more of that? And then we just, then now we have an action plan to pursue. Now I want to give just a little pushback, just ever so slightly. We're friends though. So it's okay. But a little bit of this rings like, I'm having financial problems. Somebody says, I got the solution. Make more money. So, but then the next question is of course, how do I make more money? So you're at this precipice. You've realized it. You want to be astonishingly alive. How do you find that meaning? How do you gain that vitality? Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with Cornbread Hemp. Cornbread Hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flour only, full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten free. They come in a wide variety of flavors, another perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Lissiders can save 30% off their first order at cornbreadhemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. It's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbreadhemp.com. Gabe Howard here to tell you about the inside bipolar podcast from Healthline Media. He does the show with me, Dr. Nicole Washington, aboard certified psychiatrist. That's right, a guy living with bipolar and a psychiatrist team up to discuss living well with bipolar disorder. Listen now on your favorite podcast player or visit psychcentral.com slash IBP to learn more. And we're back with Jody Wellman, author of You Only Die Once, How to Make It to the End with No Regrets. So, most of us find ourselves either in any of the other quadrants which I won't bore you with, but meaningfully bored is where most people find themselves. So, that's where they acknowledge they have enough meaning in their life, but they're just bored because they haven't maybe sparked up their social life enough lately or gone up to concerts or whatever it is that makes them feel alive. Now we're talking about real specific realities and problems. And most of us are just asleep at the switch because we've just gotten ourselves sort of glazed over into the routine of living our lives where one week leads into the next and then into the next month. And so the recommendation here as seemingly simple as it sounds is if you're thinking, for example, but you need more vitality in your life, what makes you feel alive, what makes you feel like, now I'm having a good time. And most adults actually have a hard time even answering that. And that's the first step. Is acknowledging, because you're just so busy or you just kind of lost the plot on what it takes to feel alive again. But the first step is to identify what are those things that are very, very quick and easy things like, oh, if I walk my dog by the lake, I tend to feel great. Or the big things like when I was taking those Taekwondo lessons, I was really proud of myself and I felt really fit and amazing and energetic and it was really fun. Okay, well, most of us though, we fall off the wagon with some of the activities that once brought us joy and some sort of sense of like, jua to vive. So this is an act of being conscious and scheduling the life that you might love to live. And most of us again, this is, this is, it sounds, it does sound basic, but in the work I do in working with individuals and groups, it's kind of an epidemic, you know, where we've just let ourselves kind of languish and we have forgotten about, oftentimes it's our recreation life or oftentimes it is maybe, it is our social life or it is our health or it is an area where we just tune into a diagnosis of dead zones, I call it, diagnosed where you're feeling flatlined and pick one small thing, kind of fanatical. This is not about major life overhalls. This doesn't mean you have to quit your job and move to Thailand, although I would not stop you if you chose to do that. So this is about, wait a minute, maybe I should register for that each week, learn how to do pottery course that I was kind of curious about. That's a choice to live wider, right? That's incredible. One of the things that you talk about is being on autopilot and as I was listening to you speak, I was like, well, this is just autopilot, you know, get up, do the thing, go to bed, rinse and repeat, rinse and repeat. How do you get off autopilot? Because I think you're right. I think the vast majority of people are just a slave to their habits, a slave to their routines. They're just on autopilot. Oh yeah. Yeah. I have a really contentious attitude towards habits and clearly we can keep the good ones in our lives like bathing and, you know, for me, like calling my dad Monday, Wednesday and Friday. That's a habit that helps, you know, keep relationships intact. So those are okay things, right? However, our autopilot situation comes in when we are mindlessly engaging in routines that allow us to help keep life feel organized. And I'm not here again to say like every day needs to be a new novel carnival because I don't think we could handle the stimulation. But the recommendation is look at the life you're living and see where you can just shake it up a bit like a snog loop. Where can you take one small routine and maybe shake it up this week? Like for example, do you do the same breakfast every morning? I do. I do. I do. Yeah, it's Diet Coke. I mean, it's a terrible breakfast, but it is in fact the same one every morning. I have the same morning routine. Get up and drink Diet Coke. Okay. Okay. And it may be working for you, right? That may be the thing that helps you to turn you up. All right. Maybe we don't mess with the Diet Coke. And especially if it's episode is sponsored by Coca-Cola. You, you, but what that might look like is trying something just a little bit different for one of the days, right? And maybe, maybe, for you, it's maybe it's switching it to like Diet Mountain Dew One Day or maybe it is just trying a very different meal entirely or maybe it is, for example, just to insert other things for listeners. It's like you might have the routine of a date night. Then it's just sort of the same old same old and it's fine. But what would it take to spice it up? What would it take if you order a normal Friday meal? What would it take to just try something different? What would it take to drive the different way home? What would it take if you normally do some kind of a workout? If you're like today, I'm going to do that aerial yoga thing. Which actually would terrify me. But maybe you might like just taking the things that we have on routine because routines to me are, that's the scare. It's that that's the stuff that glazes our eyes over. And that's where I think we need to be a bit vigilant and say every now and then I need to shake it up because novelty is so important for our experience of feeling alive. Just in little doses too, we don't have to again make our lives just a total whirlwind that to me sounds just exhausting. I think that is where people get in trouble though. They're bored with their lives and they think, okay, well, I need a divorce or I need a new job or I need to completely redo everything and your advice is take a pottery class. Oh, it is. And I love how reductive that sounds because it's so hilariously, perfectly on point. It's that we are, we go like ditch to ditch. You know, we're like all or nothing. Like, oh my gosh, I found myself in this slump. I used the expression before, I sleep with a switch, but it's like, I'm just letting my life kind of like carry me down the lazy river and instead of having to press the detonate button, which does, does blow things up in ways that maybe are irreparable. I think we've lost the plot and let's go back to what are the things that maybe used to bring you joy? That's number one because most of us also feel like we have to reinvent the wheel even if we are going to try and not necessarily quit the job or divorce or file for bankruptcy and do the big thing. Sometimes it's just, wait, wait, wait, what? Brought you enjoyment before. Was it volunteering when you used to go to the library and read to those kids? And you know what? You could be like, yeah, I don't even know why I stopped. It doesn't matter. You did. And now, like, what would it take to maybe just do it again, maybe even just every other week? Because those things that allow us to feel engaged in our lives, it's literally about engagement. It's literally about sending signals to ourselves that we are participating in our own lives, that we're being active and that we're not being passive and just watching the years pass us by and then seeing what's next on Netflix. And I love Netflix, by the way, so nothing against Netflix. I was going to say, I was getting ready to defend Netflix with like, I'm glad that you love it too. But sometimes it is okay, right? I mean, it's okay to like sit, watch Netflix and just, you know, chill, but just don't make it your every day. I try to mix it. I believe you said novelty is the spice of life. Yes. Literal spice of life. Yeah. Thank you for it. Because I have this like little corny thing. I call it like living a squander free life. Okay. So like, okay, squandering is very different from chilling out. So I love to chill out. I have a well-earned dent in my couch from chilling out from my behind where I just love to be there. It helps me relax from the day. But many of us have that sense when we're taking the hanging out, restoring after, oh, it's been a busy day. Sometimes we are aware, if we actually pay for honest, that niggling sense that maybe, maybe like seven nights a week, this isn't necessarily the life I would love to live. Maybe I could do this five nights a week or maybe five point five on average. And maybe for another night or a night and a half, we could like last night, this is a big deal because I'm a home body. Okay. I love, I love, I had discussed Netflix, Hulu, I'm watching it all. The last night it was like, what if we went to that cool bar and had a martini? And so we just did that and then came home and watched our shows. And that was a spice of life that we needed to feel. I'm an active, I get out there. Look at me. We did a thing and we had fun and it was just unexpected and it was ridiculously expensive which is just, let's just vent about that for a second. But you know what? It was worth it to have this experience, just a tiny little thing. And this is exactly what I'm saying. Does one martini every three weeks help to make living, you know, maybe shouldn't be using alcohol as an example, but we'll flow with it. It's a, you can substitute whatever clothes you're about. Yeah. Have the dessert sometime. Buy the popcorn at the movie theater. Do the little extra thing. That's a really cool blog post idea. Thanks. Do the extras. Hey, you're welcome. You're welcome. And you can have it for free. I won't even, no content creator contract needs to be entered into. I will, I will credit you though. Thank you. Jody, thank you, thank you. Thank you so much. Where can folks find you on the web? Where can folks find your book? Tell us everything we need to know to contact you. Thank you so much for asking. OK, so I'm over at 4000mundays.com. And there's a quiz you can fill out to find out how to edit a live URL, which is fun. And then the book, it is you only die once, how to make it to the end with no regrets. There's conveniently a page on my website called Books or you can just Google it and then you should be able to find it and live happily ever after until you die. Thank you so much, Jody, for being here. Thank you for having me. You are very welcome, Jody. And I want to give a great big thank you to all of our listeners. My name is Gabe Howard and I'm an award-winning public speaker who could be available for your next event. I also wrote a book. It's called Mental Owners as an Ascle and other observations, which you can get wherever they sell books. But if you want to sign copy with free show swag or you want to learn more about me, just head over to Gabe Howard dot com. You can also find me on TikTok and Instagram at Ask a Bipolar. All right, I need a couple of favors. The first one, wherever you downloaded this episode, please follow or subscribe to the show. It is absolutely free and you don't want to miss a thing. The next one is recommend the show. Share your favorite episode on social media. Bring us up in a support group. Hell, send somebody a text message because sharing the show with the people you know is how we're going to grow. I will see everybody next time on Inside Mental Owners. You've been listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast from Healthline Media. Have a topic or guest suggestion? Email us at show at psychcentral.com. The previous episodes can be found at psychcentral.com slash show or on your favorite podcast player. Thank you for listening. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with Cornbread Hemp. Cornbread Hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flour only, full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten free. They come in a wide variety of flavors and other perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Lissiders can save 30% off their first order at cornbreadhemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. It's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbreadhemp.com.