 We're all making a deal with a devil to some extent. Like, I think beauty norms are patriarchal and oppressive and also I'm about to go on a book tour so I'm going to get a lash lift because I'm going to have a lot of photos taken and I don't actually like to do makeup and yet I want my eyes to stand on my photos. I think people assume that if you're a feminist you are like a kind of purist ideologue and that is not case for me or most of them I work with. You're listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast where experts share experiences and the latest thinking on mental health and psychology. Here's your host Gabe Howard. Hey everybody, welcome to the podcast. I'm your host Gabe Howard. This podcast is sponsored by cornbreadhemp.com. Save 30% on your first order using code inside 30. Call it into the show today. We have Carl Lohanthyle JD. Carl is a master certified life coach, founder of the School of New Feminist Thought and host of the internationally top ranked podcast, Unef your brain. Feminist self-help for everyone. Her latest book, Take Back Your Brain, How a Sexist Society Gets In Your Head and How To Get It Out is out now. Kara, welcome to the podcast. Thank you. Thanks for having me. I am super excited to have you here today and I have so many questions and I want to let our listeners know that the questions were informed largely by our producer Lisa Kiner who almost never gets a shout out on this show but she was really instrumental in helping me discuss this in a reasonable way. So Lisa, thank you and Kara, I did my best to prepare for this but please don't hesitate to be like, dude, no, no. Okay, I feel forewarned. All right, here we go. My first question is you say that patriarchal social conditioning constrains women's behavior. Can you give us some examples of this in the workplace? Yes, absolutely. So the impact of patriarchy, I often want to just start with like, what do I mean when I say patriarchy because people hear that word, they have a lot of different ideas or beliefs about what that means or they aren't even really sure what it means. So by that we just mean a society that was for the most part created and built by men and therefore inherently has some sort of biases and favorite men. Just think about the fact that we sort of have to talk about maternity leave and then should fathers also have leave. Like if a society had been created by people who gave birth, probably that would be more baked into our kind of norms in the workplace, let's say, right? So believing in a patriarchy doesn't mean that you think every man is bad. I'm engaged to a man myself. It doesn't mean that you hate men, nothing like that, right? Just means that the society was kind of the default assumptions of things were basically created by men. And so there are obvious, there are sort of external ways that that influences women in the workforce. For example, maybe there's not a good maternity leave policy or maybe there's a maternity leave policy, but not a paternity leave policy. So like you can take up time if you're birthing, but you're, if you're married to a man, they can't get time off. So you have to deal with everything yourself at home, right? Which is obviously very difficult after you've given birth. Or there are, you know, there's a wage gap in your workplace or in your industry where men make more than women for the same job. So there are these external constraints, but what I really focus on in my work is the internalized constraints, which is that we learn what to think about ourselves from society around us. So if a society kind of has certain beliefs about what men are like and what women are like, those get absorbed into our brains and they don't come out in our own heads like there's some external announcer voice, they just sound like our thoughts. So you don't hear in your brain like the news anchor saying CEO's debate, can women really have the seat, be in the seat suite while they have kids? Like then you would know it was an external message. Well, you hear is just your own voice telling you that when you're with your kids, you're supposed to be working, when you're working, you should be with your kids and you're not handling it well and you're not balancing it well and you're a bad mom and a bad boss and yet you can't do it all, right? And so that is how the patriarchy kind of impacts our brains. So we end up with a kind of very toxic combo of some external constraints in the workplace and then a lot of internal constraints that we're bringing with us. As you were talking, I was thinking about my wife. My wife has an MBA, she's a director for the federal government. They literally call her director Howard. I mean, she has a really high power job. But whenever I say, oh, my wife can't cook or clean, she immediately gets defensive. She's like, well, I can't do it. Now listen, I she cannot. I can't, I cannot, I cannot be more clear that the woman cannot cook or clean. But here's the thing, there is no man in the world with an MBA, a director level job with the kind of power that she has and the kind of success that she has and the kind of respect that she garners just walking in a room who gives a shit that they can't cook or clean. Only she cares about this. Is that an example of this internalized messaging where she believes that this is a skill that she should have, even though it's not one that she even needs? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, women are socialized to believe that those sorts of kind of domestic related skills, right, like cooking, cleaning, and then for a lot of women also having children being a mother, being partnered at all, being married, that these are all must-haves, right? We are now in a sort of a cultural moment where women are encouraged in most communities and places to have careers, right? It's not my grandmother's generation where my grandmother, people would just assumed that she would quit after teaching for a year or two as soon as she got married and had babies, which is what happened. But we still get the message that your career is fine and that's great and it's great that you're high-powered and it's great that you're important. But that sort of isn't enough, right? If you have a man who's a director in the federal government or a director at a bank or whatever and he's not partnered or he can't cook or he can't clean, nobody would even ask him if he could cook or clean in the first place. That's also a really good point. I did not even think of that one who nobody has ever asked me if I can cook or clean and I can. Right. There you go. I mean, patriarchy is bad for everybody. You don't recognize the way you can do. So nobody would ask and if he was single, people would assume he was having the time of his life. But if a high-powered woman is single, we assume it's like, oh, something's gone wrong. She's, you know, it's sad. So I think your wife hasn't, I mean, I can't speak for your wife, but it's like common for women to have, yes, internalize those beliefs. I call this the brain gap, which is this gap between how women want to think and feel, usually with a more kind of feminist egalitarian point of view that they may be learned a little bit later in life. And then how they actually think and feel, which is often a thought pattern that they learned very young, and that has been kind of internalized for a long time. And then you get this gap where I'm sure that your wife says to herself, why do I even care? I shouldn't even care about this. But nevertheless, of course, she feels defensive because society has socialized women to feel ashamed if they can't live up to any aspect of traditional femininity, even while they're also now supposed to live into all these aspects of traditional masculinity in terms of work, career, ambition, and accomplishment. I love the concept of brain gap, but here's my question. How do we overcome it? Yeah, so the way we close any brain gap is changing the way we think. And as somebody who went to a lot of talk therapy and got into yoga and just has tried all the different things, I was felt very old. I was aware of my problematic thought patterns, but I didn't really have any tools for changing them. And that was true on a personal level and on this kind of political level or more social level. And so I think what we have to do is actually literally rewire our brains to think a new way. And what people have heard of is positive thinking or affirmations. Listen, if those work for you, that's great. I'm not knocking them necessarily. But they don't work for a lot of people. And there's actually at least one study showing that positive thinking or affirmations can actually make you feel worse if you don't believe them because it just highlights how far you are from what you want to believe. In the book, I teach the technique called the 10% less shitty thought because that's what we're going for. If you think about thought pattern change the way you would think about going to physical therapy or lifting at the gym, some kind of physical pattern you were trying to change, you can't just say to yourself, well, I want to be someone who deadlifts 400 pounds. I'm just going to go in the gym and try to pick up 400 pounds. You have to build that strength and that capacity step by step. And the same is true for your brain. It's not technically a muscle, but your brain has literal little chemical and neuronal pathways that are established in your brain with your current thoughts. So just think a new way to close that brain gap. You have to build a new little bridge across the gap thought by thought. And to do that, we really got to start with something 10% less shitty. So an example I often use is when I did a lot of work on my body image. If you think that your body is disgusting because it doesn't match what society's told you it needs to, you really can't go straight to thinking my body is a goddess. And actually in the book, I describe a hilarious experiment that a body coach told me to do about this that involved being naked in a circle of candles. And that didn't work as it turns out. But what did work was the thought, this is a human stomach. I have a human stomach. And practicing that thought over and over again until that became my default thought about my stomach and then changing that a little bit more. So if you go 10% less shitty each time, you can actually get to some of those positive thoughts you'd like to believe. But you're actually building your way there. You're not just trying to like tell a transport to having a different brain. As I was listening to you speak, I heard you hitting on these great big concepts. And I think many people who understand feminism understand the concepts like rape culture and wage gap. But what are some of the more subtle forms of sexism that fly under the radar that are absolutely impacting this internal monologue, but we don't even notice them as sexism? Yeah, I mean, I think it depends on who's doing the noticing. So I think that with a lot of women I meet, it's not so much that they don't notice sexism. It's that they don't see the connection between the sexism and their own thoughts. So they do for sure notice that for instance, at Thanksgiving their grandma keeps asking them if they're dating someone and is it serious and when are they going to have a baby? But their brother who's only two years younger or older, nobody ever asked him about it or if they just say like, oh, you're having a good time. It's fun to be young and single, right? So it's like women notice that they notice that sexist or they at least notice it seems unfair. But what they don't really realize is that then their internal dialogue about like, well, my own my friends are married and I'm not married and what's wrong with me and why am I having so much trouble with this and what am I doing wrong and dating? That is all part of that same socialization they've got. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with cornbreadhemp.com. Are you looking for an alternative to melatonin that will help you get the best night sleep that you've been dreaming about? Then look no further than cornbreadhemp CBD sleep gummies. These gummies are packed with cornbread signature CBD extracts alongside natural botanicals like lavender, camomile and valerian root to help you fall asleep and stay asleep. They are USDA certified organic and cornbread never uses any artificial ingredients, harsh solvents or synthetics. Use coupon code inside 30 and get 30% off your first order. Just go to cornbreadhemp.com. That coupon code again is inside 30, the website cornbreadhemp.com. Gabe Howard here to tell you about the inside bipolar podcast from Healthline Media. He does the show with me, Dr. Nicole Washington, aboard certified psychiatrist. That's right. A guy living with bipolar and a psychiatrist team up to discuss living well with bipolar disorder. This and now on your favorite podcast player or visit psychcentral.com slash IBP to learn more. Subscribe now so you don't miss out. And we're back with Carl Owen-Thyle, author of the new book Take Back Your Brain, How a Sex of Society Gets In Your Head and How to Get It Out. If you think about kind of the social conversation around women, there's sort of nothing in a woman's life that society assumes she knows how to do by herself. And I don't think that that's always recognized. But if you just think about all the content that is aimed at women about like, what time should you get up and what should your morning routine look like and what should your skin care look routine look like? And you probably don't know how to take care of your own hair or what that should look like. So here's a chart for what your shape face you have and what your hair should look like based on your face. And then of course you don't know how to get dressed because you don't know what the correct clothing is for your body type and what you're supposed to be trying to look like and how to be sexy but professional and not too sexy but not too professional. Don't be too frigid. I mean, it's like endless. So I think that women don't pick up on the fact that they just go through their days and they're bombarded from society and advertising and social media with content all the time, especially in the current media ecosystem that just assumes that they like cannot even know what to feed themselves, how to dress themselves, how to parent, how to show up at work. You should write emails this way. Don't use too much exclamation points. Here's what to do if you're codependent in the office. It's like there's just a constant assumption that you're doing everything wrong. And I think most women internalize that and they do think they're doing everything wrong, but they don't realize that that is a message that they've absorbed. I was really intrigued by what you said. The concept of society doesn't believe that women can do anything by themselves, that they constantly need help reassurance guidance. And I can only imagine that what that kind of micromanaging would do to a person. I've been micromanaged, but not by society. Society doesn't tell Gabe that he can't do stuff unless they know that I live with bipolar disorder and then I get closer to understanding it, but I'm still a white male. So I have privilege even in the stigma and discrimination of living with bipolar disorder. But I have to say women seem to tolerate it. And do they tolerate it for survival? Or do they tolerate it because there's just nothing they can do about it because of the power dynamics? How does that all shift out? The question is, say it to whom. Part of what I'm talking about are these big picture social trends that sort of one person can try to opt out of, but it's not like, I don't have a direct line to the editor at Condé Nast who's going to change all the articles in the online version of whatever magazine. It's really just about trying to figure out a way to navigate a society that does always assume that you need to be told what to do and you're doing things wrong. Getting the antidote to that, which is some centering and grounding in faith in yourself and your own decisions. And that only comes from changing the way you think about yourself. I mean, most women are encouraged to be their own frenemy at best, often their own adversary, constantly evaluating, critiquing and judging themselves. You talk about your wife feeling like there's some voice in your wife's brain about probably about cooking and cleaning and why it matters if her husband thinks she can cooking clean. Women are just such an object of evaluation and scrutiny that we then do that to ourselves. And so I think the way that we can change those social norms is to change our relationships with ourselves so that when our self-talk changes and the way that we talk to our self-changes, we will be less inclined to tolerate it from bosses or partners or eventually, I think, from society. I really appreciated your example of what you call it. 10% less shitty thoughts. 10% less shitty thoughts. I love that. Do you have other examples for the people listening to try to change this internal dialogue? Yeah. I think you can, one, there's sort of some, not exactly templates, but patterns that tend to work in changing thoughts. So let's say, for instance, you think that you are bad at your job in some way. Your brain will have a lot of evidence about that. Right, here's all the reasons. Let's say you're a lawyer and your brain says, well, you know, you take too long and you last month, you made that error in that motion or you lost this case or whatever. You know, you've been socialized to believe that you're not good enough. You don't measure up. You're not as smart. And now your brain is like, okay, got it. That's our belief. Here's all the evidence. So one kind of little template you can use is just the simple phrasing of like, it's possible to be a good lawyer, even if you blank. So whatever that evidence is, it's possible to be a good lawyer, even if you lose a case. It's possible to be a good lawyer, even if you make a mistake, but that works for anything. You yell at your kids and your brain tells you that you are a bad mom or a bad dad. It's possible to be a good dad, even if you sometimes yell at your kids or even good dads, sometimes yell at their kids. Right. So that's sort of that if, even or if then it sort of helps you contextualize your brain wants to like hyper focus and all the things you're doing wrong in any given area. But the reality is unless you're like, for the vast vast majority of people you're doing some stuff that's not as great and also some stuff that's fine and doing well and is good. And so even just sort of giving your brain the direction of we're not only looking at the negative thing, we're going to at least bring in that I do some other stuff well, we'll help kind of balance it out. So that for instance, is a framework you can use for almost any area of your life where your brain tells you that you're bad. I'm a bad wife, I'm a bad partner, I'm a bad mom, I'm a bad boss, I'm a bad lawyer, doctor, architect, whatever. I think sometimes these internalized messages are so strong though, you don't realize that you're doing, thinking, anything that's negative to you. In fact, when we go to the example of can women have it all? That's one that I read about a lot in preparation for this show. No man is ever questioned on whether they can have a job in children. Women are constantly questioned about whether they can have a job or children. And when we talk about these internalized messaging and I have to imagine just from the women in my own life that they feel very guilty about this. And then they get pressure from the older generation, like my mom's generation, my grandmother's generation who were both stay at home moms. My sister commented before that she feels guilty for going to work, but her husband, he's like, I need a break. I'm so thankful I have a job. And it's just, it's that shift. So my specific question is, in this long and winding path is, my sister is never going to realize that that thinking is wrong. She sees it as a protective factor. So she's not even trying to correct it. What do you say to people who don't realize that this is hurting them? Well, I'm all about concern. So I wouldn't try to change your sister's thought if she doesn't watch. Fair, fair, fair enough. But I think a lot of women don't realize because they haven't had those connections illuminated for them between what society tells you and then what the way your brain is thinking because they sound very different. So people often don't come to coaching or don't pick up the book or don'ts the podcast because they're like, oh, I know I have something called the brain gap and I need to figure out how to close it, right? Like, that's not what happens. What happens is they feel bad. They're like, I feel anxious and guilty all the time. Maybe there's a podcast I can listen to, right? I mean, it's just that negative emotion is what's driving them to seek some relief, get some help. They want to feel more confident. They want to feel as anxious. They want to feel as guilty whatever it is. And then they start to learn how to pay attention to it. So I mean, a lot of coaching work, just like forms of therapy and other kind of internal work, your emotions are really the signal to you about what's going on. Like I feel guilty all the time, right? I feel guilty that I'm working. And then if you are someone who is driven to like seek out some sort of help or support with that, that's when you can start to unpack it. Like, well, why do you feel guilty? Oh, because I have the thought that I'm a bad mom. Okay, well, when you come into my world and we teach you how your brain works, you start to be able to see like, oh, my feelings are coming from the way that I'm thinking. And the way I'm thinking is not just an objective observation of the world. It's been shaped by lots of things, my upbringing, my genetics, society. And now I can start to have tools to try to understand what I'm thinking and change it. But absolutely, most people are just aware I feel like shit about one or more areas of my life. And maybe there's something out there that would help. I love that. Thank you. Thank you so much, Cara. We're nearing the end of the show. And I always like to ask an open question to make sure that my guests get everything out that they want. Is there any question that you would literally like to ask yourself and answer for our audience to make sure that they have all the takeaways they need? Yeah, I don't know if it's a question, but I'll just say, I think you listening, whoever you are, are capable of so much more than you think you are capable of, whatever that means. It doesn't necessarily mean some huge external accomplishment. It might just mean a different relationship with yourself, a different way of being, a different feeling from your day to day. Your plasticity is the ability of the brain to change and your brain can change at any age. So you are never too old or too stuck in your thought patterns to work on changing them on purpose. And the way your brain is now, you really can't imagine how much better your life and your relationship with yourself can be if you do that work. And I don't care if you were listening to this and you're 95 years old. I have people in their 80s in my membership. Like it is never, it is never too old. It is never too ingrained. But like don't waste that incredible potential that the brain has to change. Just taking control of 10% of your brain is 100% improvement in your life. Cara, thank you so much for being here. Working folks find you and where can folks get your book, take back your brain, how a sexist society gets in your head and how to get it out. You can find my book, anywhere books are sold. And you can find me at honestly the easiest place is take back your brain book, dot com, as my last name is real pain to spell and Google. So take back your brain book dot com or Google the book, take back your brain and you will find me. Cara, thank you so much for being here. My pleasure, thanks for having me. You're very welcome Cara and I want to give a great big thank you to all of our listeners. My name is Gabe Howard and I am an award-winning public speaker who could be available for your next event. I also wrote the book Mental Owners as an Asshole and other observations which is on Amazon. However, you can grab a sign copy with free show swag or learn more about me by heading over to GabeHoward.com. You can also follow me on TikTok and Instagram at Ask a Bipolar. And hey, can you do me a favor wherever you download this podcast? Please follow or subscribe to the show. It is absolutely free. And hey, while you're doing favors, recommend the show to people sharing the show with the people you know is how we grow. I will see everybody next time on Inside Mental Health. You've been listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast from Healthline Media. Have a topic or guest suggestion? Email us at show at psychcentral.com. Previous episodes can be found at psychcentral.com slash show or on your favorite podcast player. Thank you for listening. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with cornbreadhemp.com. Are you looking for an alternative to melatonin that will help you get the best night sleep that you've been dreaming about? Then look no further than cornbreadhemp CBD sleep gummies. These gummies are packed with cornbread signature CBD extracts alongside natural botanicals like lavender, camomile and valerian root to help you fall asleep and stay asleep. They are USDA certified organic and cornbread never uses any artificial ingredients, harsh solvents or synthetics. Use coupon code inside 30 and get 30% off your first order. Just go to cornbreadhemp.com. That coupon code again is inside 30, the website cornbreadhemp.com.