 We're using language that we don't fully understand. The wider conversation doesn't necessarily mean it's a more accurate conversation. We're just learning a little bit about mental health here and there. It doesn't necessarily mean we understand the nuances. People who have received a diagnosis professionally, the idea that they're faking it is really harmful and it's a big part of mental health stigma. It's like people assuming that maybe that person is faking it can be a really hard part of living with a mental health disorder. You're listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast where experts share experiences and the latest thinking on mental health and psychology. Here's your host Gabe Howard. Hey everyone, welcome to the podcast. I'm your host Gabe Howard. This podcast is sponsored by cornbreadhemp.com. Save 30% on your first order using code inside 30. Calling into the show today, we have Rachel Beer still. Rachel is a senior editor for Healthline Media and she's been behind the scenes helping out the podcast for a long time. Rachel, welcome to this side of the microphone. Thanks Gabe. Thanks for having me. I'm excited to be here. I am super excited that you're here just to make sure the audience really knows who you are. Can you introduce yourself real quick? Yeah, absolutely. So I'm a senior editor with Healthline Media and I've been with them since 2020. So as a health editor, I manage the creation of content that publishes on our site. I have a background in biology which helps. I love science and health. I always have. And then I, in this job and prior to, I've covered a huge range of health conditions. So general wellness, like skincare over to niche, chronic conditions, including mental health topics. So it's a subject I'm super interested in and excited to talk to you about some of our listeners burning questions. Yes, I was just going to say that this puts you in the perfect seat to see all of the questions that come into Healthline Media. Now, Healthline is the largest health website in the world. There's a lot of questions upon millions of hits daily, lots and lots of search terms, lots of questions, lots of everything. And I don't want to say Rachel sees them all, but she sees the vast majority of them in her role. But most of them are mundane. I don't want to scare the audience. The vast, vast majority of them are like, what is bipolar disorder? What is schizophrenia? But then there's some unique questions that come in. There's some gems. Yep. Rachel and I were hanging out in New York City once and she's like, you're not going to believe some of these questions. And I say, well, hit me with some of them and she gave me a few of them. And I was like, oh, wow, do we ever answer them? And she's like, no, not really. They're just, they're so niche, they don't really work on the site. And she said, but I always thought it would make a good podcast. And I was like, tell me more about this podcast idea. This is it. Here we are. It's happening. Yes. I am excited Rachel. So what's the first question? So one that we thought was really interesting to start was, what are some signs that someone is just faking it when it comes to mental health issues? Do you want to jump in first? Do you want me? We never actually worked out who got to go first. I was just going to say, I think that I feel like it's a great one to start with just because there's almost like a visceral reaction to it. Everyone I've kind of told this subject to kind of looks at me a little strange. So like, you really want to answer that because I do think it's a little bit, there's not an easy black and white answer here. I am really glad that you said that it's not easy. So first off, there's no blood test. There's no hair test. You can't pee in a cup. The doctor can't stick a needle in your arm and there's nothing like that. There's no cheek swab. And I think that people don't understand that about mental health as much as they should. I think subconsciously they realize there's no definitive test, but the way that that comes out is, well, then how do we know you're telling the truth? And I do kind of understand that because we see all of these pop culture representations of people faking mental illness. And it's always played up as they're faking mental illness to get away with something. They're using it to justify a crime or they're using it to justify bad behavior. So I'm going to go out in a little bit of limb here and assume the person who asked that question now suspects that somebody is faking a mental illness because they're using it as an excuse for something. Yeah. Well, I think there's also a few other reasons like why someone might fake a mental health disorder. And I think to start also, we should say, you know, there are people out there who fake mental health disorders. I think it's unfair to assume that that is what someone is doing. And you shouldn't be doing that. But there are people who do that for various number of reasons. You know, someone who feels really organized might be like, I'm so OCD. And that's obviously a really harmful narrative to be pushing. So I don't know. There's also other accommodations and benefits that are provided for people who live with mental health disorders, which are great when someone actually does live with a mental health disorder, registering an emotional support animal. For example, that could probably be a whole other topic in a podcast. But it's great to get the benefits. I remember about 15 years ago, a celebrity. And I do remember the celebrity, but I'm going to take the high road and not out her again, but she actually published a hack for writing with your animal on a plane. And that was registering the animals and emotional support animal and claiming that you have a mental health issue. The fallout was drastic. You people were like, that's terrible. Why are you lying about this? Why are you making this up? There's people who live with mental illness. Now I live with bipolar disorder. So I was like, wow, I never thought that I would live to see the day when people wanted to be me. There's so much stigma and discrimination and pity and, frankly, insulting behavior that comes my way that somebody was just like, oh, pretend to be Gabe one day and you can ride with your dog. Oh, great. That's great. That's crazy. I'm so glad that you've boiled down my life experience to a travel hack with your pet. There's another one that comes up a lot though, Rachel, that I always love to point out. Whenever a celebrity gets caught cheating on their spouse, they immediately have sex addiction, hypersexuality, or some sort of mania, which is really reminiscent of bipolar disorder, something made them, I mean, in the air quotes, something made them cheat that was beyond their control that they're going to go seek rehab for. And that's another way that we hear about mental illness being faked, I think. Now that said, hypersexuality, mania, and sex addiction can in fact be real, but the numbers that we're seeing it, I mean, every single celebrity just happens to have this. I mean, what are the odds? And only the ones caught cheating, mind you. The ones who don't get caught, they're fine. Well, I think it's also, I think that people will use mental health as an excuse for things because it's really unlikely that someone's outright going to be like, you're lying, you know? And I think that as the conversation about mental health has become so much wider that people are more informed, or I shouldn't say informed because I don't think that's the right word, but people are more aware of mental health language, and they can use that to apply it to their own situations. And as excuses for bad behavior. So to answer the question in probably it's most mundane form, how do you know if somebody is faking? Are they under the care of a doctor? Are they doing the things that they need to be doing to treat it? Have they been diagnosed officially or were they diagnosed because they read an article and they related to it? And then finally, just because somebody has a mental health condition doesn't mean that they're being reasonable. And in fact, I would argue with somebody who lives with bipolar disorder, you know, when I was manic, when I was depressed, when I was grandiose, when I was experiencing symptoms of bipolar disorder, the thing that I may have been asking for could be very, very unreasonable. Yes. And I went out on this limb and I'm assuming the genesis of this question is because somebody is pushing boundaries or expects something from somebody and they're using mental health to justify that request. Just because somebody is mentally ill doesn't mean that your boundaries go out the window. So they can be 100% living with a mental health condition and still be asking you for something that's unreasonable. And the final little thing that I want to throw in here is listen, I live with bipolar disorder and I've done many things because of my symptoms and it is not my fault that that happened, but it is my responsibility. So if I did something to somebody because of a symptom of bipolar disorder, it's still my responsibility to make restitution. It's still my responsibility to make amends and it's still my responsibility to apologize. So if somebody did something to you because they were symptomatic and they're like, oh, well, I don't know you in apology because I was sick, that doesn't fly either. They're not taking responsibility for their illness. So as you can see, it's such a nuanced question and so much to unpack. It is. And I'm glad that you added that new ones at the end. This was a great first question, Rachel. It was. All right. What's the next one? So I feel like this was sort of like our main question and then the other ones are sort of related. So the next one is isn't self-harm just a cry for attention? Yes. Yes. I mean, okay, first off, the word just is problematic. I want you to clear. The word just a cry for attention really minimizes what people are going through. But if we really boil it down, yes, that person does in fact need help and need attention. Why are we not giving it to them? Why do you think they don't need attention? Self-harm is very... I'm getting tripped up over my own words because just the idea that we wouldn't help somebody who was harming themselves causes a visceral reaction in me. Yeah. Why would we not help someone who is obviously expressing that they need help through an act of harm on themselves? I think it fits into the theme, right, with the first question that we talked about. I could see this question being asked by the same person who submitted the first question. What are some signs that someone is just faking it when it comes to mental health issues? Isn't self-harm just a cry for attention? You know? I know exactly what you mean, and I completely understand that that's what makes it difficult for people. I think both of these questions are coming from a place of being a little bit wary about other people, and maybe that's why people are turning to health-line or social media to get those kind of answers, because they don't want to ask people in their lives and sound insensitive. I'm assuming good intent from these people, right? You know, I think that social media also doesn't help. The conversation all the time, I think people have become a lot more open talking about mental health and even self-harm, but that content, let's call it 60 seconds, is not nearly nuanced enough to capture the actual diagnosis process, and people will often put the most general symptoms. So let's say it's a tick talk about, you know, do you have bipolar disorder, and they put the four most general symptoms, especially like a young viewer, someone who's viewing that, might see three of them and say, well, I have, you know, I feel like those or I have those, and make a diagnosis for themselves, and you know, that's not necessarily their fault, but I think that we've become more comfortable talking about it, and I think that maybe these questions are a natural pushback in a way or a natural reaction to doubting a little bit. Like, have we talked too much about mental health? I would still say no, but I think that some people maybe know too quick to like medicalize our feelings and relationships and emotions, so like our typical human experiences, ups and downs and moods, or days that I'm feeling really anxious, not to minimize those, like, those can be very hard to deal with, especially as they're happening, but you know, now people might misconstrued those as being a symptom of a condition, because we're seeing so much content about what people are experiencing is real, but does it necessarily need to be a condition every time, probably not. Probably not is the correct answer, and I hope we don't throw the baby out with the bath water. I also feel like there are other reasons why someone might fake a mental health disorder in addition to an excuse for behavior, maybe that they aren't proud of. Some people might want to say that they're experiencing a symptom or a condition to feel special, and putting quotes, air quotes around special, or included, more air quotes, and growing conversations about mental health. There's also so-called more air quotes benefits of certain conditions, like being perceived as really creative or really particularly organized. Maybe you can speak to this a little bit more, but I feel like there are these perceived benefits where someone who is maybe faking a mental health disorder might want those, but not actually accept or acknowledge the reality of living with that condition, which is a lot more nuanced than a tortured artist or a very organized person. One of the things that I feel that comes up a lot, especially in pop culture, is whenever I watch a movie or a television show, and there's this really great artist, I always brace myself because I know it's coming. I know they're going to tell me that they have a mental illness or that they've experienced some sort of trauma. There's just always this idea that great art must be inspired by something horrific happening to a person, mental illness, trauma, whatever. And I hate that. One, I know a ton of artists, just some of them have a mental illness. Yes, do some of them have trauma in their backgrounds? Yes, do the majority of them? No. Many of them are boring people, and we've had lots and lots of conversations, especially with me living with bipolar disorder and me hating this trope so much. And they're like, look, we've had to design kind of a darkness in our personas as artists, even though we're happy, go lucky people, because people just expect artists to have some sort of edge. We love the edgy artist. We love the tortured soul. We love the beauty coming from a place of pain and narrative. And we love it so much that artists have realized this. Op culture has realized this. That's what sells. And it sells. Yeah. And we believe that it's true, not because it is, but because the narrative has been pushed so much. And we've really got to get away from this for so many reasons, Rachel. It's a tired narrative. It's too tired. It's a tired narrative. It's an untrue narrative. But this is the one that gets me. So I'm a speaker. I live with bipolar disorder. Obviously, one of the hallmarks of bipolar disorder is Mania. Mania is often described as being like the life of the party, very charismatic, et cetera. So I'm a speaker. Nobody wants a speaker who is not charismatic or can command the attention of a room, right? It's sort of a job requirement. And I get hit with this so often. Oh my God, Gabe, you are so great at your job because of the bipolar disorder. They've just stripped my humanity away. I first off bipolar disorder tried to kill me. I was committed to a psychiatric hospital because of bipolar disorder. It caused my family untold pain, friends. I just bipolar disorder wreak havoc on my life and the lives of people that I care about. And now you're giving credit for my hard work. Yeah. To attribute your skills and things that you've worked hard at to a disorder that you don't want and can't control, well, can hopefully control, but can't control the fact that you have it. That is really painful. I'm sure. It's very painful because it also leaves people with this idea that I somehow got lucky. Yeah. I just, it's not that I worked hard. It's not that I practiced. Is it difficult to go up on stage 20 years later? No, it's gotten a lot easier because I've gotten a lot of practice. But it's always hard to do something the first time. You know, there was a first speech. There was a first speech in front of a whole group of people and I had to find the everything to get up on that stage. And listen Rachel, I was terrible. It was awful. I did not do a particularly great job if you're validating me as a speaker. But I was real and I was vulnerable and I tried really hard and I'm really proud that I did it because it set the stage for all of the other speeches that came. By polar disorder had nothing to do with that. By polar disorder did in fact choose my subject. I cannot get around that. But listen, I would have found something else to talk about and I would have worked just as hard. I just, I can't help but think that if I did not live with by polar disorder that I'd still be a loudmouthed extrovert doing something with my voice. I just, I refuse to believe that by polar disorder made me into this. And there's a little bit of pain that people believe that I didn't work hard. I just got lucky. Absolutely. I also just, I feel like that's a mischaracterization of Mania because of how people understand it based on movies and other content they've consumed. I feel and please correct me if I'm wrong, but I feel like if someone was truly in a manic episode they would not be able to well at least memorize a speech and maybe they wouldn't even show up to their scheduled duties. I think that people think that when you're in a manic episode you're just like, it's like you're using your brain to 100% of its abilities and you're just, you don't need to sleep and that's a good thing. And you know, people are funnier and happier and just have these all these creative ideas when really like you're very, you can be, I'm sure it's different for everyone, but like you're very disjointed and jumping from one thing to another and putting yourself at risk in certain ways too. Like maybe you're getting paid for a gig and you don't even show up even though that's your livelihood. Exactly. Mania is extraordinarily dangerous. It cannot be controlled and it's a symptom of an illness for a reason. Yeah. And the very idea that anything good comes out of it is it best luck. But what it mostly is is just good PR. The public relations team for Mania is incredibly because no matter what Mania does, they find a way to spin it so it's a positive. You know, oh, you screamed at your parents and left, but then you went to that party and remember that's where you met that guy and it was awesome. Remember it completely erases the fact that you told off your family on the way out the door. You missed your kids birthday party. You quit your job and you ended up in Las Vegas and it just focuses on that incredible dance move that you learned. It's like, well, now wait a minute. Hang on. Whenever anybody tells the story, they find that one little snippet where yeah, look, I cannot deny that Mania has gotten me into some places that frankly, the story is kind of cool because I just would not have had the confidence to get there without it. But I heard a lot of people and it was not worth it. It was not worth the trade. Don't mistake an accidental benefit for a good life choice. Yeah. I'm glad that you brought that nuance into it too because I think it's an important point. I don't think that bipolar disorder has like some sort of a backdoor gift that made me better. I think it only made me worse and who wants to be associated with being worse. Right. But it is important to say, Rachel, and I want to make sure we touch on this as we're getting ready to close. Mental health and mental illness are not the same thing. They're sort of related, but they're not the same thing. And we need to understand that while all mental illness is mental health, not all mental health is mental illness. Mental health can also be good. Mental illness can never be good. Right. We should all be striving to have good mental health, right? I think that that's a really important thing for us to all strive to be doing a little bit more. I completely agree. Rachel, thank you so much for hanging out with me today. I hope you had fun. I did. Thank you for having me, Gabe. It was great. Well, you are very welcome, Rachel. And I want to give a great big thank you to all of our listeners. My name is Gabe Howard, and I'm an award-winning public speaker, and I could be available for your next event. I also wrote the book Mental Illness is an asshole and other observations, which you can get on Amazon. But if you want to get a signed copy and get some free swag, just hit me up on my website, GabeHoward.com. And wherever you downloaded this episode, please follow or subscribe to the show. It is absolutely free and the only way to guarantee that you don't miss a thing. And can you do me a favor, recommend the show to your friends, your family, your colleagues, share us on social media, share us in a support group, send somebody a text message because sharing the show with the people you know is how we're going to grow. I will see everybody next time on Inside Mental Health. You've been listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast from Healthline Media. Have a topic or guest suggestion? Email us at show at psychcentral.com. Previous episodes can be found at psychcentral.com slash show or on your favorite podcast player. Thank you for listening. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with cornbreadhemp.com. Are you looking for an alternative to melatonin that will help you get the best night sleep that you've been dreaming about? Then look no further than cornbread hemp CBD sleep gummies. These gummies are packed with cornbread signature CBD extracts alongside natural botanicals like lavender, camomile and valerian root to help you fall asleep and stay asleep. They are USDA certified organic and cornbread never uses any artificial ingredients, harsh solvents or synthetics. Use coupon code inside 30 and get 30% off your first order. Just go to cornbreadhemp.com. That coupon code again is inside 30, the website cornbreadhemp.com.