https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mgmVOuLgFB0&list=PLriLgVg0-Kgzu0Y-Rz2ofUT1E53lUjh_T

Let me tell you something you already know
The world ain't all sunshine and rainbows 
It's a very mean and nasty place, 
and I don't care how tough you are, it will beat you to your knees and keep you there if you let it. 
You, me or nobody is gonna hit as hard as life. 
But it ain't about how hard you hit. 
It's about how hard you can get hit and keep moving forward. 
How much you can take and keep moving forward. 
That's how winning is done! 
Pain is temporary.  
It may last a minute, or an hour, or a day, or even a year, 
but eventually it will subside 
and something else will take its place. 
If I quit, however, it lasts forever. 
The margin for error is so small... 
one-half a step too late or early, and you don't quite make it. 
One half-second too slow, too fast, you don't quite catch it. 
The inches we need are everywhere around us. 
They're in every break of the game, every minute, every second. 
You got a dream, you gotta protect it. 
People can't do something themselves they wanna tell you you can't do it. 
If you want something, go get it. Period. 
Don't be afraid to fail. 
You can’t always win, but don’t afraid of making decisions. 
You have to believe that something different can happen. 
He who says he can 
And he who says he can’t are both usually right 
Most of you said that you want to be successful, but you don’t want it bad.  
You just kinda want it. 
You don’t want it bad than you want to party.  
You don’t want it as much as you want to be cool.  
Most of you don’t want success as much as you want to sleep!  
Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. 
Our deepest fear is that we are powerful beyond measure. 
It is our light not our darkness that most frightens us. 
You have to dig deep down, dig deep down and ask yourselves,   
Who do you want to be? 
Figuring out for yourselves what makes you happy, 
no matter how crazy it may sound to other people. 
Make a choice.  
Just decide, 
what it’s gonna be, who you’re gonna be, how you are going to do it. 
Just decide. 
Why not? 
Why can't I be MVP of the league? 
Why can't I be the best player in the league? 
I don’t see why. Why, why can't I do that? 
What is it you said to the kid? 
It ain't about how hard you hit. 
It's about how hard you can get hit and keep moving forward. How much you can take and keep moving forward. 
Get up. 
Get up. 
Get up and don't ever give up.  
And we can stay here, get the shit kicked out of us... 
or  
we can fight our way back into the light. 
We can climb out of hell... 
...one inch at a time. 
To be able at any moment 
Sacrifice what you are for what you will become. 
Most of you won't be successful because when you're studying, and you get tired, you quit. 
‘I’m not good in math.’ That’s right, because you never study! 
‘I’m no good in rhyme.’ Because you never write before! 
Talent you have naturally. 
Skill is only developed by hours and hours and hours of beating on your craft. 
If you are not making someone else’s life better,  
you’re wasting your time. 
Don't cry to quit, cry to keep going. 
Don’t cry to quits.  
You already in pain, you already hurt. Get a reward from it. 
If you know what you're worth, go and get what you're worth! 
But you gotta be willing to take the hits, 
and not pointing fingers saying you ain't where you wanna be because of him or her or anybody! 
Cowards do that, and that ain't you! 
You're better than that! 
Every day is a new day. 
Every moment is a new moment. 
Now you've got to go out and show them that you're a new creature. 
Now! 
I'ma show you how great I am! 
In the seventeenth chapter of St. Luke, it’s written “the kingdom of God is within man”, 
not one man nor a group of men, but in all men! In you! 
You, the people, have the power, 
the power to create machines, 
the power to create happiness 
You, the people, have the power to make this life free and beautiful, 
to make this life a wonderful adventure. 
Now! 
What are you gonna do? 
Because limits 
like fears  
are often 
just an illusion. 
 - Generated with https://kome.ai