 I mean, women have always had affairs, even in cultures where you can be beheaded and stone to death in the street. Women still cheat as often as they ever have. So I mean, that's an interesting statistic. Like, why are we looking for alternative relationships even when it could kill us? You know, it's hard to get really good statistics on how often people cheat because cheating is based on dishonesty, right? And so people lie to the researchers. So we don't really know. You're listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast where experts share experiences and the latest thinking on mental health and psychology. Here's your host, Gabe Howard. Hey everybody, welcome to the show I'm your host, Gabe Howard. This podcast is sponsored by cornbreadhemp.com. Save 30% on your first order using code inside 30. Calling into the show today, we have Tammy Nelson, PhD. Dr. Nelson is a board certified sexologist and AACCT certified sex therapist and a licensed professional counselor. She's also the author of many books, including when you're the one who cheats, Dr. Nelson, welcome to the podcast. Thanks. Thanks for having me. Oh, thanks so much for being here. Now before we get started, I want to give a great big shout out to Ashley Madison.com for hooking us up. I want to ask, as a doctor, as a sexologist, a site that brags about helping people have affairs, is that empowering for relationships or non-empowering? What are your thoughts on that? Well, I don't know if it's Ashley Madison that is the impetus for people to have affairs. I think because of the size of their platform, they have 80 million members worldwide, it has become sort of a cultural phenomenon, a place for people to outsource some of their relationship needs. And I mean, currently 20% of their membership is identifying as being in an open relationship, which is the part that is intriguing to me that they're changing a bit of their social construct around what people are really looking for. That's, I think, fascinating. You know, many people believe that men are the gatekeepers of monogamy. Society believes that it's men who are most likely to cheat, that it's men who are most likely to push for alternative lifestyles. And on a more misogynistic tone, people believe that men are in charge of keeping their female partners in line. But you have found out, and Ashley Madison has found out that women are actually the gatekeepers of monogamy. Is that true? And how do we even truly know? I mean, I don't know where that line comes from keeping their women in line. That sounds a little archaic. But the dairy archaic, people believe that's why men are in charge. I know, isn't it? It's terrible. It's terrible. But it's one of the things that came up. Yeah, it sounds kind of abusive. But the reality is research and my own clinical experience over the past 35 years and just anecdotally, from places like Ashley Madison, are places where people are actually, quote unquote, hooking up. The reality is that men, let's say, who are looking for alternative partners or affairs, actually are looking for relationships. So even if they don't want to end their marriage, they don't necessarily want just sexual partners. They want an actual connection with someone in order to have sex with them. And interestingly, this is for heterosexual people, women just want sex. Really? They don't want to hear their outside partners problems with their marriage. They're like, you have a wife for that. Like, I don't want to get involved with your problems. Like, just have sex with me after I put the kids on the bus and then let's never talk again. So it's really a misunderstanding and a little bit of gender coding to think that men just want to have a fairest for sex and women want emotion. It's actually clearly not the case. And I think it's, you know, we're not giving men enough credit to ascribe to them this idea that they just think about their penis and about sex because I think that we, especially as we age, a lot of men are looking for the emotional connection that perhaps they're not getting in their long term relationships at home. When you go out into society and you talk about monogamy, it's very much believed to be male driven, but it's female driven. Where do we get that disconnect so much that we believe that men are in charge? Well, the reality is that women statistically lose interest in monogamy much sooner than men and men will stay in a monogamy relationship to have sex, even if it's like okay sex and women won't, women will cheat much sooner and much earlier in monogamy than men will. It doesn't work for them as well. And for obvious reasons, I mean, women have in heterosexual relationships have more responsibility, particularly with families. And so they get burnt out and tired quicker and it just not as refreshing. I mean, it's not pathological to lose desire for boring sex. There's nothing wrong with you if you don't want to have sex if it's like not rewarding. And so women actually won't settle for sex that's not rewarding anymore. We've come a long way and we're not going to take boring sex. So statistically, women actually cheat as often as men and now they have as much opportunity to do so as they ever have. I'm looking at you and you have red hair. There's a reason that there used to be the joke that the postman or the male man was the person you had the affair with and that's why the kid had red hair like the male man. Because that was the only person who had opportunity to do it with. That was the only person that came to the house. You never went out. You didn't have a job. You didn't go out into town. But now women have just as much opportunity, right? Because they're out in the world. We do know that men brag about their affairs and women will still hide their affairs because there's more consequences for women. There's more name calling. We still have a fear of losing our children or being berated or losing our financial security all that stuff. So women have become very good at hiding their affairs over the years. Is it more common for women to cheat or is it just more open? If the reality is women because they have more options because they're out in the world more because they have more opportunity, also they're not settling and they are much more transparent about the need to have multiple partners and not settle for partners that they're not happy with. Let's talk about open marriages where people are open, ethical non-monogamy, polyamorous relationships. Relationships where people are very open not only with their partners, but also the general society that they're in this open marriage. I was surprised to learn that more often than not, it's women who are driving that and not men because the stereotype is that the man is unhappy and the woman gives in. Can you help bust that myth for us? The truth is that women are the gatekeepers of open relationships. It only happens in heterosexual relationships if the woman is ready to make it happen. Unless it's like a coercive, manipulative, abusive relationship where the male partner says, if you don't do this, then I will fill in the blank. I'll leave. I'll get divorced. I'll cheat on you anyway. Then we're not talking about an open relationship. It's a non-consensual non-monogamous relationship in that scenario. In open relationships, the more common scenario in male-female, monogamous relationships is that it may be the male partner that thinks of it or brings it up first or wants to do something spicy, like have a threesome. It takes the female partner a little bit longer to wrap their mind around it. They might do what I call communication fatigue, sort of talk it to death for a while. Then once she says, okay, let's do it, then the gate is open and they try it and they experiment. Many times it's the man that wants to shut it down first and says, okay, I tried. This is no fun anymore. She's like, I'm good. I'll let you know what I'm done. That's a really common, just antidotally. There's a really common scenario. Is this a generational thing? Is the younger generation driving this, or is it just always been there? Now talking about it more. For sure, in the last couple of generations, the kids have grown up with parents that got divorced or cheated on each other. This is a generation that's saying, you know what? Just because we're in love or married doesn't mean we're dead. We're going to be attracted to other people, but we don't want to lie about it, like our parents did, because we learned that that's where the pain points were growing up. That divorce really didn't work for us. That destroyed our parents financially. It destroyed us emotionally. We all had to go to therapy. We don't want to do that to our children and to our families. I also would say that just like women in the 60s were sort of the gatekeepers of an open sexual revolution. That big shift happened in our culture because women could have access to birth control. Because of that, they really took charge of their sexual lives and things changed dramatically. Also because women are like, I'm going to decide what my marriage is going to look like. Once again, it's optional for women because marriage is optional for women. For the first time, probably in 200 years, we don't have to get married to have life insurance, health insurance, children. We don't have to get married to have sex. We don't have to get married financially. If we're privileged enough to have money to support ourselves, this is not true for everyone, obviously. But if marriage is optional, then we get to choose who it's with and how we're going to do it. That's really what has shifted dramatically in our culture. That's why I think we're a monogamy revolution. Dr. Nelson, I'm just curious. Let's say that you're listening right now and you're thinking, I want to open my marriage up. I want to practice ethical non-monogamy. I want to start having sex with multiple people. I've still got my looks. I'm ready. I'm ready. Obviously, you don't want to hurt your partner so you don't want to have an affair. You want to do this. Now you've got to sit down and discuss it with them. Do you have any conversation starters for this? This is what I call open monogamy, which is my most recent book, Open Monogamy, which is a guide to co-creating your ideal relationship agreement. It's really about creating an agreement. The first conversation would be, I heard this podcast and I'd like to talk about our open monogamy, which implies that you have a central or primary relationship at home. Your marriage or your committed partnership is your priority. That is our north star, our shared value. We're always going to come back to this relationship. What can we add or expand on or what do we have enough of that we can use as overflow? It's going to take away from us and really figuring out what your boundaries are going to be, what your guardrails are. Let's say that you bring this up to your partner and you say, hey, I want to have an open marriage. It's just an open monogamy and they freak out. You don't love me anymore. You want a divorce. You've got one foot out the door. Who is it? Who is she? Who is she? You know, everybody's just pandemonium breaks out. How do you de-escalate that and reassure your partner that one, it's just a discussion. Nothing has happened. And two, you want the discussion to be serious, but you also want to reassure them that they can still trust you. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with Cornbread Hemp. Cornbread Hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flour only, full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten free. They come in a wide variety of flavors and other perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Lissiders can save 30% off their first order at cornbreadhemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. That's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbreadhemp.com. Gabe Howard here to tell you about the inside bipolar podcast from Healthline Media. He does the show with me, Dr. Nicole Washington, aboard certified psychiatrist. That's right, a guy living with bipolar and a psychiatrist team up to discuss living well with bipolar disorder. Listen now on your favorite podcast player or visit psychcentral.com slash IBB to learn more. Subscribe now so you don't miss out. I believe that my monogamy includes masturbation. That's no big deal. Your partner is like, I thought you'd stop that when we got married and your partner is like, I've been doing that since I was 12. It really has nothing to do with you. Where is the gap in what you implicitly assume is monogamy and your partner disagrees with? It may be you believe, it doesn't count if I go out with my friends and we go to bars and flirt with people and your partner is like, no, you're never flirting with anybody. Maybe you look at pornography together. Maybe you have fantasies that you talk about but you never take into reality. Maybe you have one-three-some together on your anniversary. But you never do anything else separately. What are the parameters that are in your gap, in that gap between what you believe and what your partner believes? And reassuring them, when you say you want to open your relationship, your partner might be thinking, oh, that means you want to go date other people. You're going to fall in love with someone. You're going to leave me and you're thinking, no, I just wanted to go to a party and walk around and look at people. I just thought we could share our fantasies and maybe flirt with someone online. Go on Ashley Madison and go shopping. We're looking at shoes together. Maybe you need to just get a little bit more finite about what you mean and reassure your partner. No matter what, our relationship will always come first. This is not an alternative. This is the icing on that cake. Dr. Nelson, I got to tell you one of the things that has been most fascinating to me is when I was doing research for this episode, it was always how to get the sex that you want, how to find the sex that you want. The entire time we've been talking, you're talking about getting the sex that you need. It hits very differently. This is the sex that you need. This is what you need to have a good life. Are people looking at sex wrong? Because it is always tabled as this is what I want. This is what I want. This is what I want. But I just couldn't help but notice that you're always framing it as a need. Well, I mean, it is true that good sex will perpetuate a healthier relationship. It's not only good for you as an individual. It keeps you younger, it keeps you healthier, it keeps you happier. But it also is the number one indicator of a long term happy relationship. You want to know what to work on in your relationship, work on your sex life. That is the thing that is going to keep you from feeling disheartened and hopeless. There's two parts of a relationship. There's companionship, which is your roommate ability. Your get along, hang out, pay the mortgage, watch Netflix, walk the dog. A lot of people are really good friends. They've been living together for a long time. They can hang out. They can be roommates. But the whole other side of your relationship is eroticism. That's where the passion lives and the aliveness and the not just I love you, but I'm in love with you. We have this misunderstanding that if you're just good enough friends, then your sex life will just take care of itself. It actually works the other way. The safer you are and the more you focus on your roommate life, the less erotic your relationship becomes. We're not really taught how to work on our sex life. We're not taught how to talk about it. We're not taught how to make it happen in our relationship. Maybe put on a costume and roleplay, but there's really no other advice. There's a lot of advice on how to cheat and how to split that erotic relationship energy outside of your relationship. Go find it with someone else. Go on porn. Split it off outside of this. There's this sort of joke about marriage gets boring. You're not going to want to have sex with your partner. This is not true. But it does take as much work as it does to make your companionship work to make your sex life stay hot or even get more exciting as you get older. I think that's the dream for your sex life to get more and more and more exciting. I'm just curious, Dr. Nelson, are there any common mistakes or pitfalls that couples fall into when they're opening up their marriage? And if so, do you have any hints or tips on how to prevent that? Yeah, I think the number one mistake is don't do it too fast. Like slow down. Slow the train down. Talk about the fantasies first. Do the what if conversation. And the second one is don't put so many rules on each other. A rule is something that you put on the other person and then the relationship becomes very perentified. So a rule is something first of all it's meant to be broken. Second of all, someone has to maintain the consequences for that rule being broken. So if I say, well, there's a rule that you have to be home at midnight, then if you come on a 12-15, first of all, I have to stay up till midnight. And then I have to punish you somehow for being home late. And now I'm like your mother. And now you're like the bad kid that's like doing something wrong. And who wants that kind of relationship? So you can't make rules. What you can do is have boundaries for yourself. Boundaries are something you put on yourself and your own boundaries can be flexible. But you can't decide what somebody else's boundaries are. So I might say, you know, my boundaries are that we have to really agree on times that work for us. And I can't be out late and I'm just too tired. Like I would just work too long hours and I can't sleep well. So my boundaries are like I got to be asleep by 10. Year boundaries might be that you need to hear from me every day by text and if you don't you get uncomfortable. That's not a rule. If I don't, if I don't do it, you're not going to punish me. You may have to change your boundaries and we may have to have discussions around it. But that is a big mistake people make. And I hear that all the time. Like, okay, let's talk about the rules of our monogamy agreement. And my nogamy agreement is really about what if conversation along the monogamy continuum? What are we going to do if this happens? What do we do if this happens? What can we do if this happens? I have like a free handout. If people want to email me that say they heard me on this podcast, I can send it to you. It's part of the open monogamy agreement. Like what do we ask each other to make sure that we hit all those points so that there's no misunderstanding. And then you can change your mind. Like that's the third and last point. Like this is flexible and fluid and ongoing. Whatever you agreed to today, it can be totally different next week and it should be. You should revisit this all the time. I mean, we redo our driver's license in our passport every couple years. We should redo our monogamy agreement too. It's not like a one time I said I would never cheat on you once and I'll let you know if I changed my mind. Like this should be ongoing. Oh, Dr. Nelson, thank you so much. I have one last question I wanted to save for towards the end. Again, in researching of this show, one of the things that came up over and over and over again is that opening up your marriage is the last ditch effort for Devoris. Now, nothing that you've said in the show indicates that at all. In fact, it indicates the opposite. But it was a persistent thing that came up over and over and over again. Why this belief out in society that couples who are opening their marriage are just trying to save it? Well, I think there is a percentage of people that are doing that. I think it absolutely, it's an alternative to trading each other in for someone else. And so some couples will look at it as, well, I don't want to get divorced but I don't want to leave. And I'd like to continue to co-parent and I'd like to live in the same house and it's too expensive to live separately and Devoris is financially ruinous. But I want to be with other people. And so a lot of people will try that option. And I think some of those people are sort of looking to swing from branch to branch with the safety of their current partner. Like I'm just sticking around until I can find someone else. And I think in a way that's sort of preentifying your partner. Just give me permission to go out and cheat until I find someone else and then I'll leave you. And maybe that's part of the monogamy continuum too. The reality is some people say they couldn't give their partner permission to be in an open relationship because they're afraid they'll fall in love. Well, first of all, it's not your permission to give. It's your partner's decision to make. And secondly, your partner could fall in love at any time. Just go into the grocery store. Like that is not preventing your partner from leaving or falling in love or wanting to be with someone else. An open relationship is actually the opposite. It's actually many ways preventative because now you have the openness of a conversation where you can say, you know what, I'm starting to have like weird feelings about this person. I'm either going to see it till it gets to its natural conclusion when, you know, I realize I really don't want to marry this person. It's too complicated. I have all this history with you and that's much more valuable. Or I'm going to pull out of this. Now we're going to have like a veto where we go, oh, this is dangerous. And remember, our relationship comes first. So anything that feels threatening, we should just get out. And to be that open about it, you know, the people that cheat, they don't come home and say, oh my God, I met someone and I'm really attracted to them. Let's talk about it. They go, oh, I met someone I'm really attracted to them. I'm going to go for it because that must mean that I should sleep with them. It doesn't necessarily mean you should sleep with them. It means that you're human and we sometimes are attracted to other people and wouldn't it be interesting to be able to process that with your best friend at home and figure out what to do about that? Dr. Nelson, thank you so much for taking the time today. American folks find you online and where can they get your books? You can go to my website, drtammynellsson.com, drtammynellsson.com. You can go to openmonogamy.com if you want to find that book. And please email me, Tammy at drtammynellsson.com and say you heard me on Gabe Howard's show. And I'll be happy to send you an open monogamy agreement form. You can find more details in the book, of course. But in all my books, I have six books. They're all on Amazon as well. Dr. Nelson, thank you so much for being here. My name is Gabe Howard and I'm an award-winning public speaker who could be available for your next event. I also wrote a book. It's called Mental Owners as an Asshole and Other Observations, which you can get on Amazon. But you can grab a sign copy with free show swag or learn more about me over at Gabe Howard dot com. Wherever you download this episode, please follow or subscribe to the show. It is absolutely free and you don't want to miss a thing. And do me a favor. Recommend the show. Share your favorite episode on social media. Bring us up in a support group. Share in the show with the people you know is how we grow. I will see everybody next time. Inside Mental Owners. You've been listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast from Healthline Media. Have a topic or guest suggestion? Email us at show at psychcentral.com. Previous episodes can be found at psychcentral.com slash show or on your favorite podcast player. Thank you for listening. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with Cornbread Hemp. Cornbread Hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flower only, full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten free. They come in a wide variety of flavors, another perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Lissiders can save 30% off their first order at cornbreadhemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. That's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbreadhemp.com.