 I think you can do both. You can love your family. You can also want to know your other family and your roots and who you are. It's like an inherent right, I think, to know who you are. Because we strive for it. Like, we may not know where searching, but we are always, because you have like this, this hole that's missing. And you're taken from your mother. It's a, it's a strange scenario. If you think about it and you put somewhere else, no one talks to you about it and you just try to navigate the world and saw all these little subtle things growing up. Effect, a lot of people. You're listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast where experts share experiences and the latest thinking on mental health and psychology. Here's your host, Gabe Howard. Hey listeners, thanks for being here. I'm your host, Gabe Howard. This podcast is sponsored by cornbreadhemp.com, save 30% on your first order using code inside 30. Calling into the show today, we have Sarah Reinhardt and Louise Brown. Together they host the podcast adoption, the making of me, a podcast by and for adoptees. Louise and Sarah, welcome to the podcast. Hey, thanks for having us. Yeah, thanks for having us on. This is great. Thank you both so much for being here. I have to say, before I started doing like any amount of research for this show and before I met you, I didn't realize that adoption is always discussed, not almost always discussed, from the perspective of the adoptive parents. It's always, you're going to adopt a child. What are you doing to prepare? There's not a lot of conversations about, hey, you are an adopted child. What is your perspective? And I'm just curious, why do you think that is? Well, I think there's a lot of stuff wrapped up into the reasons why our voices haven't been featured. There's a public narrative that adoption is a wonderful thing that everybody benefits, that children are luckier, taken from horrible homes and put into better homes. Then to be crass, it's a multi-billion dollar industry. Babies cost money. Resources go into getting babies and not into helping family preservation. I know that pop culture is a terrible place to get any information. I want to be very clear. Someone who lives with bipolar disorder, whenever I see a portrayal of somebody with mental illness, I just roll my eyes and I think it's ridiculous. Yeah, but it did occur to me that I, I can't really think of a main character outside of Lily from modern family who has been adopted and we saw even a slight amount of their perspective, Lily's perspective, the adoptee. We saw her parents perspective the most, the couple who adopted her. But beyond that, it just, it really is you get adopted, you're right, you were lucky, you won the lottery in some way, escape something horrible and you owe everything to the people who adopted you and there's just no downside. You did say something that I wanted to just point out a word you used, oh, that you owe gratitude, right? So adoptees feel that. We owe, yes. We sense it even as young children, you better be good. And at any moment, it could be taken away because that was our first message. You're born, you're relinquished from your mother and then you're placed into some random family and there's a debt incurred. I mean, that is kind of what goes on beneath the surface. That has to be an incredible burden. I think adoptees are just getting their voices out as part of why you're also just tearing about this because for years, they're, you know, considered, they're not considered in the adoption talk. In fact, sometimes birth mothers are rarely, it's usually just the industry of adoption. So adoptees in general, you can be a happy adoptee. I was a happy adoptee as they say when nice placement, a great family who I still love, contrary to what people may think if you have a podcast about it. It's more about all adoptees inside suffer a lot of stuff that maybe the general public doesn't know. You know, there's all ranges of what can happen with people. There's four times higher suicide rate, higher incarceration rate. We're 2% of the population. We make up big volumes of things that we shouldn't, you know, mental illness, drug addiction, alcoholism. Yeah. And it also just little things. Anxiety is feeling insecure, trying to fit in, not knowing, not having mirroring. Especially from our era, your identity was erased. Right. And you're kind of told not to ask about it in subtle ways. It's a very rare thing when you are encouraged to ask about it. So you're just kind of nullified. I really hate to ask, how does that make you feel? But sincerely, how does it make you feel? Well, we have different situations, but similar, we both had young mothers and my biological mom chose to give me up, but it was all based on a lot of narrative coming at her. You know, she was 19. She did have a stable job. She was a stable person, half of her college education, and still it was a lot of talk. Of course, she'll give this baby up. You'll be such a better life. They should have two parents. And she bought right into that because she was missing a father a lot of her life. So I have letters of hers. And so a lot of them were very just, I'm doing the right thing. And this is what I should do. You know, it was just this message put on her. My, my birth mother did not, she didn't know she was pregnant. She too was adopted. And her adopted mother was older. She was from an older conservative Lutheran minister and his wife family who, when they found out that she was pregnant, which was after I was born, the very kind of dramatic birth, refused to let her hold me and made her give me up. She was 18 and varies still under the influence of them. So when I found all that out, I mean, she had told me when I met her, but I wasn't ready for the information. So it was recently, when I read the birth records and saw what she went through and just how tossed around she was, I was really angry. I mean, really angry about how, you know, and how many of us are out there that went through and you know it, the body keeps the score, right? So you know, you know, your mother's voice, when you're in utero, you know, all that stuff. So that trauma carries with one throughout their life. Yeah, I was, I was with my mother for six days. So it wasn't obviously something she easily did. And she had to go to a judge and hand me over with some friends there sobbing after she was with me for six days. It's like, if you think about that scene and then you were in that scene because we don't remember it obviously, but you do. As Sarah says, I think you do remember it and I think that's what does affect the adoptee. And every adoptee has a different story. Did they go to foster care for years? Were they directly the next day somewhere? I mean, it's all very that their birth mother hold them like Sarah's mother wasn't even allowed to hold her. I can imagine that scene is sad. That's why these stories are important. One of the things that you mentioned is when you try to process your childhood, your feelings that it seems and I don't want to put words in your mouth, but it seems like you're you're being mean to your adoptive parents. You even took the step Louise of saying, and I love them. They're, you know, they're great, right? You have no complaints against them. And then you add it in, which seems odd because I have a podcast. And you're right. It does seem like, oh, well, the only reason that you would have a podcast is if you're adoptive parents did something wrong. Discrentled. Yeah. Right. But we really do need to change that line of thinking. Right? Again, I just want to use my lived experience. I talk about all the things that my parents did wrong, raising a child with untreated bipolar disorder all the time. And I get an incredible amount of pushback where people say, well, they did the best they could. They didn't know either. It's not their fault. They were trying. I'm like, I never said they weren't. I just said they made a mistake to put about it. Is that what adoptees deal with that anytime you say, hey, this was hard for me. Instead of addressing that it was hard for you, they say, well, everybody tried. They did the best they could. And then they ignore the thing that you're trying to get addressed or break down. I think that's a good analogy. Not you, sir. Yes. The grateful thing, right? There's an expectation, even if it's never said, even if even if it's not admitted, even if it's not at the surface of your consciousness, there is an underlying message that we should be grateful that we were spared. These saviors came along to help us. And yes, sometimes there are children that really need help. I think there are other solutions rather than completely erasing their identity and giving them a new name and cutting them off from any of their family members. But there are circumstances in which children need care elsewhere. But that isn't the case for everybody. Like in my case, my birth mother didn't want to give me away. She was forced. And it's hard to reconcile the anger that we might have with our adoptive parents. There's a lot of guilt. I've gone through a lot of feelings and changes over the last few years. And then accompanying that is just this extreme guilt that I have. And that's something that I'm still trying to heal from. Figure that out. So it is worth pointing out that you value the relationship. I think that some people here that I'm going to use complaints. I'm making air quotes for those that don't have the benefit of video. And they think, oh, well, you must not want to talk to them. You want to cut them off. You hate your parents, et cetera. And you're saying, no, I love my parents very much. But I also have complaints. I do think that's a difficult thing for people to understand. They think, well, if you have complaints, then you want to cut your parents off. And if you have no complaints, your parents are perfect. And Disney music plays when they walk into the room. I can imagine how this is a very, very difficult balancing act. Again, especially when all of society is like, well, you should be grateful. Your life would have sucked if it wasn't for your adoptive parents. Those are my words. But that does seem to be the opinion of society. We are definitely, what's the word I'm looking for? A check to find, even as adults, we're still called the adopted child, right? Fantilized. We're in phantomized. Recently, I got my original birth certificate. And I wanted my unredacted records. Now, it's been over 50 years since I was born and I got my birth certificate pretty easily. But getting my unredacted records was difficult. And I had to petition a judge. I had to send obituaries of my birth parents, even though I was in reigning with my birth mother, even though my birth father's family knows who I am and embrace me into their world, I still had to prove all of this in order to get my records. Like, this is, this is a human rights violation. You know, not having access to that stuff to know who we are and what we might face in the future. And I mean, it's so we're still objectified and infantilized, as we said. One of the things that you said that really struck me is you were the answer to someone's infertility problem. And the minute you use those words, it was like, oh my god, you're right. You were the answer to somebody's infertility problem or the answer to somebody's inability to have a triode biologically. But didn't it evolve? There's this piece of me that really just wants to be polyanna and just believe that, well, that's how it started. But then it got better, right? Did did you stay the answer to somebody's infertility problem your entire life or that just how it started? What's it like when you become, you know, five, 10, 15, 20? Are you still seeing that way? Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with Cornbread Hemp. Cornbread Hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flour only, full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten-free. They come in a wide variety of flavors, another perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Lissiders can save 30% off their first order at cornbreadhemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. That's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbreadhemp.com. Gabe Howard here to tell you about the inside bipolar podcast from Healthline Media. He does the show with me, Dr. Nicole Washington, aboard certified psychiatrist. That's right, a guy living with bipolar and a psychiatrist team up to discuss living well with bipolar disorder. Lissah now on your favorite podcast player or visit psychcentral.com slash IBP to learn more. Subscribe now so you don't miss out. And we're back with Louise Brown and Sarah Reinhardt discussing the perspective of adult adoptees. I don't think necessarily you're still seeing that way, but what I want to go back to something Louise said and something that is assumed, right? And especially in our era, born in the 60s. There was no therapy. People who had infertility problems didn't talk about it or heal from that. They just immediately then went to, oh, here's a solution. Someone else's baby. This is a blank slate baby. It has no feelings or emotions. Nothing existed prior to me taking this baby into my arms. And therefore, yes, projection onto it. And I think often, you know, at least from our anecdotal evidence of 100 episodes or so with talking to adopted people is that when we do come into who we are, because genetics are a big part of who you are, you know, and you get to be around 13 or 14 in the hormones come along and you start acting out. And then it's like, wait a minute, this is not who I thought this baby was. I don't really know how to answer that because it's not been spoken about like, do I talk to my pay? Did you ever stop seeing me as an answer to your infertility? All right. And I think also just what you said, Sarah, about projection. I mean, I think this is so subliminal. There's many, many great adopted parents out there. So when people hear this message, they shouldn't be like, oh, they hate all this. That's not true. There's so many wonderful adopted parents out there. But what they should also know is we all do this to our kids. I have my own biological kid, right? I put my own expectations on him, which you're like, ah, stop doing that, stop putting that. So when you're adopted, you even have more of that, I think a little bit, because you don't really fit and people pretend you fit. So it's like, why is she like this? She's not like us. It doesn't happen in all families, but it's very common. And adoptees feel very, like two people, like you're this person trying to please and fit in and look around and maybe you are, you know, the great adoptee and pleasing and all that. But one day it kind of comes crashing in because there's a lot of control stuff going on. You internalize all this stuff. There's so many of these things that are happening too by trying to not talk about it. Like if I had been able to talk about it when I was younger, I think it would have really helped me. I had a lot of questions, right? But you stop asking because you see the reaction from everybody. Nobody wants you to talk about it. When I was doing research for this particular episode, I read that a lot of people who are adopted have attachment issues or suffer from abandonedment issues or have intimacy issues or difficulty getting close to other people. Is that true? And do either of you have any thoughts on why that might be? That is true. We have lots of thoughts on why that might be. Please, please share. Trust, you know, being relinquished abandoned, so you don't feel safe. But if you get close, that person could leave as simple as I can bet it. A big thing adoptees do is they push, they want you to be with them so badly, but they push you away, then they're upset when you leave, and it's like all these things that you find out later when you come out of the fight, you think, oh my god, thank god. Like if I had known this earlier because you're so self-sabotaging in relationships. Did either one of you have this issue? Yes, we both have this issue. When I was a kid, my father who played football called me Heisman because I did that. You can't see it with my hand on the podcast, but I did the whole where you push people. I literally would say enough and you can't hug me anymore. And with every boyfriend, husbands, I'm like, oh no, you can't. It's like I don't like to just be hugged. A lot of adoptees don't like to be hugged or just intimacy issues. You choose people who are unavailable and may hurt you again and again. I mean, there's so many things. I recently reconnected with a boyfriend from when I was 20. We live together. We hadn't seen each other in all these years. He said, you know, I remember, and we weren't even talking about my adoption or anything. He was going back in his head. Like he goes, I remember every time I try to get really close to you or look at you in the eyes, you would have to pull away. You couldn't handle it. And that continued to be true. Yeah, relationships can play adoptees. And then when we have our own children, you get very close to your own child. There's a lot of fear of that separation. Overholding on sometimes. And there's, you know, until you figure it out, you know, it's not like we have it figured out. We have a lifetime left to go, figuring it out. But it does help to know, you know, if you can name something, then it helps, right? Because otherwise you just think you're weird. Like, what's wrong with me? And then you realize, oh, there's this whole other group that has the same problem. And again, I imagine that it's very, very difficult to get help. When every time you ask for help, somebody is immediately reminding you that it was for your own good. It was in your best interest that that your adoptive parents tried very hard. They did the best they could and so forth. And you're like, yeah, I know. I didn't say any of those things. All I said was I'm having trouble with this. And instead of helping me or responding to what I'm saying, you're defending a whole bunch of points that I did not bring into this. Do either of you find that frustrating? I guess I hadn't thought about it in that way. I just know that I was looked at as weird. Like, I remember my mom saying to me, you know, Sarah, you could walk into a room and there would be 500 men, 499 of them would be available. And you'd choose the unavailable priest in the corner. Like, it was always put on me and made a joke of without ever looking at why that might be. Louise Sarah, I really appreciate you both being here. And of course, I appreciate the new perspective that you have given to me and of course to our listeners. The reality is that this podcast episode isn't going to be able to adequately cover this topic, not a single one, but luckily the two of you have a podcast adoption, the making of me. So I would encourage all of our listeners who want to hear more to head over there. Yes. And also and not to be afraid of it, you know, every guest is different. You might hear something from someone you relate to if you're an adoptee or or not an adoptee. Love people outside the community, listen to our podcast and learn from it. And I'm learning from it. We're learning too. It's not doom and gloom. It's also let's go forward and make some changes in here from people. I love that message. Thank you both so much for your time today and for being here. Thanks for having us. This was great. Really enjoyed it. Yeah, me too. Thank you, game. Well, you are very welcome. And I want to give a great big thank you to all of our listeners. My name is Gabe Howard and I'm an award-winning public speaker who could be available for your next event. I'm also the author of the book Mental Owners is an asshole and other observations, which is on Amazon. However, you can get a sign copy with free show swag or learn more about me just by heading over to our website Gabe Howard dot com. You can also follow me on Instagram and TikTok at Ask a Bipolar. Wherever you download this episode, please follow or subscribe to the show. It is absolutely free and you don't want to miss a thing. And hey, can you do me a favor? Recommend the show to your friends and family members. Bring it up in a support group. Share your favorite episode on social media. Sharing the show with the people you know is how we grow. I will see everybody next time on Inside Mental Health. You've been listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast from Healthline Media. Have a topic or guest suggestion. Email us at show at psychcentral.com. Previous episodes can be found at psychcentral.com slash show or on your favorite podcast player. Thank you for listening. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with cornbread hemp.com. Are you looking for an alternative to melatonin that will help you get the best night sleep that you've been dreaming about? Then look no further than cornbread hemp CBD sleep gummies. These gummies are packed with cornbread signature CBD extracts alongside natural botanicals like lavender, camomile and valerian root to help you fall asleep and stay asleep. They are USDA certified organic and cornbread never uses any artificial ingredients, harsh solvents or synthetics. Use coupon code inside 30 and get 30% off your first order. Just go to cornbreadhemp.com. That coupon code again is inside 30, the website cornbreadhemp.com.