 Like watching car slow down when there's a wreck on the side of a road, because it's just evokes some emotions and getting sort of sucked in. I can't be using that word because it's so attractive. It's so like interesting and it's like you get really caught up in it and instead really kind of thinking about is this someone's opinion, is this more watch I can data driven? We're listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast where experts share experiences and the latest thinking on mental health and psychology. Here's your host Gabe Howard. Hey everybody, welcome to the podcast. I'm your host Gabe Howard. This podcast is sponsored by cornbreadhemp.com, save 30% on your first order using code Inside 30. Calling into the show today we have Dr. Michelle A. Patrickwin. Dr. Patrickwin is the director of research at the Menager Clinic, an associate professor at the Baylor College of Medicine and a board member for the anxiety and depression association of America. Dr. Patrickwin, welcome to the podcast. Thanks so much for having me Gabe. So I am excited to talk about election stress because I'm definitely one of those people that is just completely stressed out about the election. But I know the show is not about me and you're not my therapist. So I want to start really at the beginning. What is election stress and is this a uniquely American thing or do other countries struggle with this as well? Yeah, super good question. Election stress, I actually have to give credit to ADA for coming up with that term. I think they really got that going. It honestly affects everyone. It affects everyone whether you're in the United States or globally if you wouldn't know no matter what political party you are. This is a major stressor. It's a major sense of uncertainty because of that. It just is, it affects everybody. It's really, I don't want to put too fine of a point on it. When you say that it affects everybody, it's all political parties. I think that Americans generally believe that their party is stressed out because they're fighting the evil of the other party and the other party is fine because for some reason the quote unquote evil people can't be stressed out, I guess. It seems like this quagmire where everybody believes they're the only ones who care about society. When an actuality, this is something that bonds us. Everybody in society is worried about this, but of course we're not talking to each other to get that kind of support. What's the solution? Hmm. Oh, I think that's the million dollar or billion dollar question. I don't know if I'm going to give it to you on a podcast. But I think when it comes down to it, you're talking about developing mutual understanding. What you said really hits the nail on the head that we are all trying to do the best we can and ensure our values, our world view, politics align with that. We win in our world view and all these things also win. But everyone is just trying to figure out what's best and to understand and have their ideas on what's best. And just because they don't align with someone else's doesn't necessarily mean that they're evil or wrong or a horrible person us as humans are just trying to evolve, survive and have a good quality of life. Those ideas on how to do that are going to be incredibly different. And that's okay. One of the things that struck me while you were talking is that you said that when your candidate wins, your world view wins and therefore what you love and care about wins. But I was I was curious it from a practical standpoint, if your candidate loses that doesn't mean that everything that you love and care about also loses and dies, right? I mean, I've just I've seen presidents from both the the Democrat side and the Republican side in my lifetime and my values have remained very consistent. So I'm not seeing my values die, but I will admit when my candidate loses, I become ultra fearful that my values will die. Yes, right. Well, and I think it gets down to I think we get very wrapped up and that's part of media, right? They get us real wrapped up and emotionally invested and ready to sort of join the battle, join the fight. And because we're so emotionally invested, we think this is the end all, be all, but but this is this is not true, right? We're almost get too attached to the political process party and and it's not just our fault, right? That's part of the marketing, right? And that's part of the the attraction of it and to really feel emotionally invested in this. But but in the end, your worldview is not what the political parties worldview is. You are not attached. Whether you that political party wins or loses, isn't mean you win or lose anything. You don't have to win or lose anything. You can stay thinking the same things you thought before says the same. It really seems like a lot of the marketing for the presidential campaign, especially this year is fear mongering. If this person wins, you will die. If this person wins and it's both sides, I want to be very clear. I'm not alluding to any candidate over the other. It just seems like everything you read, the stuff that comes out from the candidates and then also all of the other like political action committees who are also releasing their own ads. They always have this doomsday scenario. And again, I'm almost 50 years old. I've lived through a lot of presidential elections and I've seen these doomsday scenarios before. It just seems like now the rhetoric is worse. But then I'm reminded that our country went through a civil war. How could it be worse when we were literally firing guns at our fellow countrymen? The whole thing leaves me very confused, which of course contributes greatly to my personal anxiety. Yeah. You know, I think the praying on fear, right? Yeah, I've seen that too. And if you think about it from like an evolutionary standpoint, it's brilliant. That's our core fear survival, right? That this, that we are here and when we are in our most sort of anxious, activated state, like that's like what we do is we just try to survive as individual. If we get kind of feeling more safe and secure, then we can do work on social connectedness, reciprocity, all those things. But it's really a strong strategy, I would say, in a, I wouldn't say in a manipulative way, but you know, they're praying on emotions and our core fears, fears around uncertainty. One thing that when elections aren't certain, you're not sure how they're going to turn out. And one way to kind of pray on that is a fear plus saying it's going to be certain. Saying some sort of direction and finite, oh yeah, well, this is the way it's going to be. So if this happens, this is the way it's going to be. Yeah, it really does seem like the messaging is this is the thing to be afraid of. And I have the solution. And by the way, that's definitely going to happen. And it almost never seems to happen. But yet, cycle after cycle after cycle, people believe the rhetoric again. How do we get people to sort of rise above that and look at the actual policies and have a more reasonable view of what happens when an election occurs? Yeah, how do we rise above the fear and the stress? And I think one way always, right, with fear, anxiety, taking a step back, not letting that fear and anxiety drive your actions, the way you view yourself, the way you view others, recognizing it, labeling it even. Sometimes it's really hard to just dial yourself back and think, oh, right, I'm worrying about something. Okay, this election is really making me really afraid about this topic and this happening. And instead of getting wrapped up in the emotionality or the messaging that someone may be delivering to you, thinking about it in a more concrete way, you're getting your information even. Are you getting your information from social media and these kind of more emotionally driven ads, these little clips of information that in no way can capture everything? Or are you getting your information from maybe reading about a more expert in the field and more objective sort of view that may or may not change? People get kind of ramped up and worried about it, fearful about it. But in the end, for the most part, it's fine. One of the things that shocks me the most is I love my wife. I do. And I picked her to be my wife out of all of the available choices and she's just one person and I married her. I don't agree with everything she says. You're hurted here first. I don't think that that should be a controversial statement, but sometimes she'll say things and I think that's wrong. Sometimes she'll say things and I say that's wrong. Because we don't agree and we have to just agree to disagree for the sake of our marriage. The reason that I bring all this up is because I'm shocked to the number of people who 100% agree with a politician. They're just like this politician, 100% of the time, never makes a mistake, gets everything right, never gets it wrong. They are perfect in every way. How do we go from not trusting our spouses, but we completely trust a politician? I see a great number of my fellow country people believing this. And again, I want to be very, very clear on both sides of the political spectrum. Yeah, yeah. That is a really, really interesting point. Especially with social media and the things that we see in front of us, we've just processed that information in a way that's fast, not very analytical. We just take it all in and agree with it for the most part, right? It can go either way. I think it's very binary, right? Black and white. Oh, no, I completely disagree or I completely agree. I think with kind of agreeing 100% with a politician, we are trying to derive certainty and unequivocal sort of, I'm going to buy in, I'm going to, because this is going to provide some stability, right? Stability and my ideas and my sense of direction for the future. And so I 100% will just agree to everything. You use different resources to kind of frame your worldview. That's just a way to have some certainty about that. Okay, this politician agrees with this. It's the political party that I align with and so we go with that. I'm framing this question in terms of the election, but it's really just a broader question. Whenever somebody hears that something is going wrong or going bad, they tend to as humans, we as humans tend to believe that. Whenever we hear that something is improved, we're very skeptical. What is it about us that makes a steer completely into the negative as if it's unmitigated fact, flawless in every way, but the minute you say things are improving, the economy is improving, crime is improving, unemployment is improving, people are like, well, I don't think that's true. Yeah, well, I think part of that comes from trying to prevent those negative things from happening, right? And think about it. So like we are going to really zone in on those negative things because those feed our worries and we're worried about all sorts of different things and we don't want them to happen. And when good things start to happen, we're skeptical because we want to make sure when these bad things happen, we weren't blindsided. I knew that was going to happen. I predicted that that would happen and so I've prepared an XYZ way and it didn't blind inside me and I'm prepared for it. But I think in the end that also sets us up to kind of always be on the defensive, right? Always be in this stance of what is bad going to happen and ultimately we live in a very complicated world and there's always things that you can think about negatively or there are negative things happening and that's just the way the world is. And you know, not that we want to have any, I saw you just did something on toxic positivity. So right, there's a realistic, right? Like a realistic way of, in a hopeful way of really thinking about stressful events, election or not. That's in the middle. That's more sort of objective, thoughtful and ultimately every situation is never black and white. It doesn't matter. It's never a binary. It's never a zero one like the computers. We're humans and it's always gray. Every situation is gray. Speaking of black and white thinking, my black and white thinking would make me think that after the election, if your candidate won, your stress gets better and if your candidate loses, your stress gets worse. Is it that clear or does the cycle just start over again and just look slightly different in the beginning, but eventually we end up back at the same place? Dave Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with cornbread hemp. Cornbread hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flour only, full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten free. They come in a wide variety of flavors, another perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Cornbreaders can save 30% off their first order at cornbread hemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. That's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbread hemp.com. Dave Howard here to tell you about the inside bipolar podcast from Healthline Media. He does the show with me, Dr. Nicole Washington, a board certified psychiatrist. That's right, a guy living with bipolar and a psychiatrist team up to discuss living well with bipolar disorder. Listen now on your favorite podcast player or visit psychcentral.com slash IBB to learn more. Subscribe now so you don't miss out. And we're back with Dr. Michelle A. Patrick Wing discussing how not to stress out over the upcoming election. We just end up back at the same place, particularly we get in these patterns of thinking, right, this automatic kind of thought processes. And when we do that oftentimes, we just find another stressful event to latch on to and potentially repeat those ways of thinking instead of trying to work on realistically reversing them and using it almost as a way to really work on our anxiety, our stress management, how to deal with these things and then apply it to another situation. The election is in practice. It's a big stressor. I know it's very stressful for everyone, but how do we use that in a way that doesn't replicate or exacerbate other additional stresses we have? And what would that look like? How do we not steer into the anxiety but instead steer away from it? Yeah. So keep talking about media. So I think definitely get off the social media, stop scrolling. I gotta do that myself. So no one's perfect at it, but I think stop mindlessly absorbing information, really, really important being conscious of what you're viewing seeing and then how it affects you internally. If you find yourself being triggered or getting angry, upset, you don't need to look at that information, right? Especially like on Instagram or Facebook. If it's really evoking some strong negative emotions in you, just stop looking at it. And there's no healthy reason to be looking at that information. I also think getting involved in things that you love outside of your phone and whether that's time with your family or volunteering a new place, meeting up with old friends, you haven't met up with, you know, there's so many different things you can do learning a new sport or whatever. All of these kind of things to really get yourself out of a sort of negative cycle in terms of stressful event. I also think connecting with other people, developing, especially those who may have different political beliefs than you, challenging, but right? Like if you can have some really strong relationships with people on the opposite side of the political spectrum from you, that can be incredibly reassuring, right? That you have shared common values, interests and really have a good friend, which is always a good thing. But then also just really making sure that you kind of start to understand that other side a little bit more and that can relieve a lot of stress. People often say that in polite conversation, you should never talk about money, religion, or politics. But your advice seems to be to find someone who disagrees with you and then become friends with them. And I got to be honest, it sounds super difficult because if you feel like that person disagrees with your morals and your values and your ethics and they're so very wrong in their thinking, how do you even begin to bridge that gap and become friends with them in the first place? Where do you even start? Well, I think that the first thing is really reframing how you think about when someone disagrees with you politically, that they're not immoral, that they're not wrong, right? That instead they actually just have a difference of opinion and a different way of thinking about the world. And one of my best friends from college is very on a different side of the political spectrum. And it has taken a lot of time, I think your first impulse can be wrong immoral. This is not the way that we think about things, but it takes time and understanding and really getting into some of the nuances and you're like, whoa, okay, I understand why you think that way or I understand why the whole kind of history of all sorts of stuff, how you got to this as a value. And that isn't something that you're just going to do in a second, relationships, building relationships, it takes time and it takes understanding and shared interests outside of values, politics, all sorts of things. I think it's really powerful though, starting to really understand the other side in a more nuanced, right, thoughtful way and not jumping to conclusions. Because like you said, in the end, when you get down to the nitty-gritty or you get talking about stories or experiences you have, I have found in conversations there is so much empathy, understanding, I may vote this way, but when we talk about certain story or experience with someone who cares about you, it doesn't matter how you vote politically, they're going to say, I'm so sorry that happened and just really connect. And so I think not getting lost in the kind of grandstanding, that kind of attitude. And at the core, again, like we're talking about, these things are so gray, people don't necessarily believe everything that the political party may vote for, getting to really understand where they're coming from, why, what are the stories and the life experiences that they have had that got them to this point. That I think in the end actually is incredibly healing, incredibly stress relieving, it's like, oh, I totally see how you got to this ideas and the reason you vote this way or lean this way. And I still love you no matter what and you're not necessarily wrong. We just think, you know, you can always make fun of them too. So that I'll ask you for help. We embrace humor as healthy. Humor is so healthy and it's fun and you know, a little competition and it doesn't have to be so serious. I cannot agree more. One of the things that I always think about is when somebody's in trouble, we don't run up to them and ask them the political affiliation. We run up to them. We see this in traffic accidents. We see this when people lose their children in the mall. We see this when we see scared people. We immediately help them and we don't ask them any questions about any of this. Politics takes a backseat when we see people in trouble. I think we need to remember that when we're just bored, when we're just walking through life, everybody's just trying to make their own way and make the best decisions for them. And sometimes we're going to disagree on some things. But ultimately, I do truly believe that if I were in a crisis, if I needed help in the middle of the world, if I was out in public, people would come and help me and I don't believe that any of them would care about my political affiliation. No, they definitely wouldn't. Dr. Patrick Quinn, as we wrap up this show, I just have to ask, is there any other advice that you can share with people who are experiencing election stress? I would just say, you know, we keep bringing up the term uncertainty. And when things are uncertain or, you know, you're not sure of the outcome, that doesn't equal catastrophe. I think we catastrophize that's the big word we use in the way that sometimes we kind of have these automatic ways of thinking that when things are uncertain or we're just not sure they outcome, we just go to the worst. We were talking about that earlier. And uncertainty doesn't equal the worst outcome. Uncertainty, it's uncertain what the outcome will be. So we have to remember that that can also be a very positive thing. But we can't always be really trying to get out of that automatic jump to the negative. I want to know that's protective and we want to stay safe. And so we really are always kind of jumping to like protecting ourselves, our families. And that makes a lot of sense. But it also does make sense to maintain and to understand that there is hope. There is the other side. And that really there is a positive uncertainty just means we don't know and don't know mean it could be either way. Dr. Patrickwin, thank you so much for being here. Can you tell us a little bit about the ADA and about the Baylor College of Medicine and the Manager Clinic, please? Sure. Yeah, I'm so happy to tell you about all the three of those things. I'm really fortunate to work with all of those groups. So ADA is the anxiety and depression association of America and recently joined their board and just a fantastic organization and resource for a host of mental health disorders, particularly anxiety and depression and those that co-occur with it. But definitely check those out. There's some good resources there. And then also I'm director of research at the Meninger Clinic and we're inpatient outpatient psychiatric hospital and we're actually one of the top psychiatric hospitals in the United States and have been for as long as there have been US news and world rankings of psychiatric hospitals. So we're very proud of that. And also I'm associate professor of Baylor College of Medicine and do a lot of research with our wonderful colleagues at Baylor. We absolutely appreciate you and we appreciate all of our listeners as well. My name is Gabe Howard and I'm an award-winning public speaker and I could be available for your next event. I also wrote the book Mental Illness as an Asshole and other observations which you can get on Amazon because everything is on Amazon. However, if you want to sign copy and get some free podcast swag or you just want to learn more about me, head over to my website GabeHoward.com. Wherever you download this episode, please follow or subscribe to the show. It is absolutely free and you don't want to miss a thing. And hey, can you do me a favor? Recommend the show to the people you know. Sharing the show with those you know is how we grow. I will see everybody next time on Inside Mental Health. You've been listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast from Healthline Media. Have a topic or guest suggestion? Email us at show at psychcentral.com. Previous episodes can be found at psychcentral.com slash show or on your favorite podcast player. Thank you for listening. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with cornbreadhemp.com. Are you looking for an alternative to melatonin that will help you get the best night sleep that you've been dreaming about? Then look no further than cornbread hemp CBD sleep gummies. These gummies are packed with cornbread signature CBD extracts alongside natural botanicals like lavender, camomile and valerian root to help you fall asleep and stay asleep. They are USDA certified organic and cornbread never uses any artificial ingredients, harsh solvents or synthetics. Use coupon code inside 30 and get 30% off your first order. Just go to cornbreadhemp.com. That coupon code again is inside 30, the website cornbreadhemp.com.