 You know, I always think every thought that I have is dipped in schizophrenia. It's all I've ever known. I grew up seeing monsters. It's not something that I've ever lived without. There's monsters with me right now. I hallucinate a good 90% of the time. I'm always kind of not 100% sure if something I saw or experienced is all real. It's very much a part of me. For me, this is part of who I am. You're listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast where experts share experiences and the latest thinking on mental health and psychology. Here's your host Gabe Howard. Welcome to the show everyone. I'm your host Gabe Howard. This podcast is sponsored by cornbreadhemp.com, save 30% on your first order using code inside 30. Following into the show today, we have a Rachel star withers. Rachel is an entertainer, international speaker, video producer and a person who lives with schizophrenia. She has appeared on MTV's Ridiculousness, Marvel's Black Panther, to be shockfite and is the host of our very own Healthline Media podcast Inside Schizophrenia. Rachel, welcome to the podcast. Thank you so much for having me Gabe. Well, as you know, you and I work together over on Inside Schizophrenia where you share your lived experience and also, well, you know, medical facts and you interview other people who live with schizophrenia and you interview caregivers about, you know, taking care of people who live with schizophrenia and family members and friends and support you do a lot for schizophrenia advocacy. I bow to you. Well, thank you so much Gabe and obviously you do quite a bit with the show too. Thank you. And if you're listening out there and you haven't checked out Inside Schizophrenia, even if you don't have schizophrenia, it's a very interesting show. I think it's great for anyone who is interested in psychology in general. I have a lot of med students who contact us and so many of them are like, hey, I never knew this side of medicine was even going on like all of the stuff. So please check it out if you haven't and Gabe, we get into some crazy topics. I mean, serial killers, mass shooters, we talk about lobotomies. So it's not just like this fluffy caregivers taking care of us for a little people. It's schizophrenia. Like we hit on all the topics recently we talked about institutionalization. Yeah, we hit on everything and you know, I say we because I just want to feel like I'm involved but Rachel, you're the driving force behind this. You're really creating a new narrative for what it means to live with schizophrenia. And that's why I wanted to invite you on the show today because we tell stories on Inside Mental Health all the time, people who have overcome addiction, mental illness, people who have overcome all kinds of things. And we have our own Rachel who has overcome so much. And of course, as a thought leader in the process, I want to go all the way back to the beginning. Like day one, how did you find out that you had schizophrenia? So super cool. I grew up in the South and when I say South, I mean the hardcore Bible belt, South Carolina and growing up, I had what I would later learn were hallucinations. I would see faces and things. I would hear things in the wall and it was always like there was a radio left on or TV in like another room at a house. So it was kind of like this gibberish. I can't tell you what the people were saying but I always heard gibberish going on because I grew up in the church. I thought, oh, demons. That's what you go to church three times a week and that's what the pastor is always talking about is angels and demons and Satan and God is so common sense that's what he was talking about. So that's what I grew up just assuming that that's what that was and it wasn't until I was 17 years old that I was like talking to one of my friends and they were like, Rachel, what in the world are you talking about? And that was the moment I realized, oh, other people don't see all these things. So what did you do when you found out that other people aren't experiencing the world the same way that you are? Did you immediately go to a doctor? Did you realize you were sick or did you just think that you were special? I was 17 and in high school so I shut up. I did not, I did not want to become a social outcast. I was already weird to start with here. You know, and now I'm not going to add this to the fact. So I just kind of didn't say anything until I got out of high school and that's when things really started to unravel. I went to a kind of post-tie school, between college school, everything fell apart and I was still scared to tell anyone how bad it was. So I started with just admitting that I wanted to kill myself and when I, and it wasn't just suicide, I was talking like suicidal ideation to urges, to very violent wanting to hurt myself in very graphic ways. But again, I was still holding back if you can imagine. And of course, the place I went, this post-high school area was Christian so they were like, don't worry, we're going to get you help, we're going to put you through an exorcism. Wait, wait, wait, the solution to this was an exorcism, at least in their mind. Yeah, yeah. And again, I'm holding back, I'm holding back. I don't need to jump ahead in your story. I just want to make sure that the listeners understand that when you finally got help, the help was an exorcism. Right, yeah. And this is before you were officially diagnosed with schizophrenia. So you start to reach out, you start to get help and they're like, okay, no problem, exorcism. Yep, I went to the school therapist who, you know, looking back, I was young so I didn't check their credentials, but they prescribed me antidepressants at the time. So they were able to prescribe medicine. So they were a medical person of some sort. This wasn't just like a church worker. There was really was a medical person who after the antidepressants didn't work said, hey, you need an exorcism, which I always like to point this fact out because I feel like that's a scary part to the story gave is that there was medical people involved in this decision. Spoiler alert though, the exorcism didn't work. So did you at least get a diagnosis during the, I'm going to call it the exorcism part of your story? Did they say you have schizophrenia and the solution is an exorcism or did they still believe that it was something else and you hadn't yet gotten a medical diagnosis? The medical diagnosis was depression and demons. Depression and demons. Depression and demons. Depression and demons, okay. Now the exorcism didn't work. No, it did not. So you had to move on to phase two. How did that work itself out? How did they determine that it didn't work? How did you realize that it wasn't working? How did you get to more traditional medical care? Well, directly after the exorcism, I thought it did work because I'd went three days without food. You could only have water and a bunch of people touching when I say touching, I don't mean bad, well, not great good touching, but I don't mean bad, bad touching. I mean like laying on hands. So if you're in the church, you understand what I just said. But it was three days of that which shockingly I was exhausted. And so my mind was very quiet. And then of course, after I had food and rest, everything came back. And I went back to the counselor, I went back to the people to the exorcism. I said, hey, the demons are back. And they said, well, the only way they're back is if you chose this. So then my diagnosis went from depression with demons to Rachel's choosing Satan over God. Wow. What was that like to hear? Well, it was bad. And I was pretty much ostracized. I wasn't kicked out of the school because money, but I was separated and wasn't allowed near the other students. So I wouldn't spread my Satanism. Did you have family support during this time? What were your parents thinking? My parents had no idea. This was I, you wouldn't live on a campus in Texas. Another red flag there, but anyway. Yeah, I mean, this was as far as they knew it was a Christian academy that Rachel was at for a year. And they didn't know this was going on. They didn't know that you had been diagnosed with depression with demons. They didn't know that you needed medical care. They didn't know that you were getting an exorcism. No, they had no idea. All of this was spiraling out of control. Wow. It wasn't until I got home and I tried to keep it to myself. Things kept spiraling and eventually around age 21. I did finally go to a psychiatrist and get help and was officially diagnosed at the time with paranoid schizophrenia. Wow. And then what happened? So now you've got, I'm going to say real medical care. Now you're getting real doctors, real medical care. What happened then? What did this set in motion? Oh, I mean, I just continue to spiral for those people who are listening who've been on any sort of kind of medication. It's like playing Russian roulette when it comes to mental health. You're on one med, they tweak it, they add another med, and you're just trying to find something that works. And unfortunately, we didn't realize at that time that I have what's called treatment resistance schizophrenia, meaning that meds just don't work very well on me. So I spent many years going through kind of this Russian roulette, doing all these different meds, doing different therapies. I also had electric embulsive therapy. I went through all types of different things. And you know, I'm 39 now. So keep in mind this whole medical journey started at age 21. And we're still going through it. I can't say like we found that one thing that works because yeah, over the years I found something that worked. It might have worked for a few months. It might have worked for a few years. Then it kind of stops. Would you consider yourself to be in recovery with schizophrenia right now? I don't see myself, I don't see myself as sick. Recovery kind of makes you sound like, well, I was sick and now I'm better. I kind of see my schizophrenia as the baseline. And I'm just trying to make it every single day. And some days, yes, it is a lot worse. And I have a hard time yesterday. It was very, very difficult for me. Today I'm doing significantly better. And I can go and tell everybody that after this episode, after we're done recording today, I'm going to crash probably for the next 10 hours. And hopefully tomorrow will be, you know, a better day, but it very well could be the opposite. So I don't like to say recovery. So your baseline to help people understand Rachel today, right? Now as we're sitting here in 2024, how would you describe your life? What words would you use? Is it a good life? Is it a bad life? Are you suffering? Are you excelling? Are you thriving? Are you just existing? I mean, it's a bad ass life. I mean, you could pick apart things and be like, oh, without parts sad or that part's amazing. I just got back for China. I've had an amazing year. I've gotten to do some like really cool stuff just this year. And I feel like that's what it's all about. Tomorrow might totally suck, but I'm going to keep finding ways to like be a bad ass. I want to go and do more stunts. I like fighting. I like to film stuff. And I want to keep doing all of those things. So let's talk about that for a moment. In your introduction here, we mentioned that you were in a Marvel movie. I was. Yes. I've been in a few of them. Yes. You were in a few a bit, but you were in black Panther. It's really awesome. But what we didn't mention is that you have set yourself on fire before and not because of schizophrenia. You've set yourself on fire because you are a legit real life stunt woman who has done stunts in some of the most expensive movies and blockbusters ever made. Does anybody ever say to you, though, okay, now wait a minute, you'd have to be crazy to set yourself on fire. And oh, you have schizophrenia. Do they try to draw a connection there where one does not exist or do you feel that it does exist? That is funny because that's the part of my life I try and play down the connection because yeah, people think, oh, you do crazy things like stunts. Okay, it must be because of schizophrenia. And it's actually the opposite. I can only do stunts when I'm mentally okay. When I do the setting on fire stunts, it requires so much prep. It would not be possible to do in the middle of a psychotic episode. And the fact that it's not just me and a match. There are other people around. You have safety people. You have like all these different protocols that you set up. So no, the amazing cool stunts has nothing to do with the schizophrenia. It's two completely separate parts of my life. And both of them make me a badass, but no, they're not connected. I really like how you pointed out that in order to do a high level stunt, I mean, this is, you know, Marvel movies are big, big movies. Somebody who is behaving erratically, somebody who can't take direction, somebody who can't wait patiently. I know there's a lot of hurry up and wait on a movie set. Somebody who is acting erratically because of the symptoms of schizophrenia. I really don't think that people around them are going to be like, all right, well, it's later on fire. Yeah, you have to be 100% on making air quotes normal. You have to be solid, stable, have a strong constitution and foundation in order to pull off these high level stunts. But still, you have to admit, when you hear a little woman with schizophrenia is running around doing stunts that include setting herself on fire, there's a visceral reaction that you think that's a bad idea. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with cornbreadhemp.com. Are you looking for an alternative to melatonin that will help you get the best night sleep that you've been dreaming about? Then look no further than cornbreadhemp CBD sleep gummies. These gummies are packed with cornbread signature CBD extracts alongside natural botanicals like lavender, camomile and valerian root to help you fall asleep and stay asleep. They are USDA certified organic and cornbread never uses any artificial ingredients, harsh solvents or synthetics. Use coupon code inside 30 and get 30% off your first order. Just go to cornbreadhemp.com. That coupon code again is inside 30, the website cornbreadhemp.com. Gabe Howard here to tell you about the inside bipolar podcast from Healthline Media. He does the show with me, Dr. Nicole Washington, a board certified psychiatrist. That's right, a guy living with bipolar and a psychiatrist team up to discuss living well with bipolar disorder. This and now on your favorite podcast player or visit psychcentral.com slash IBP to learn more. Subscribe now so you don't miss out. And we're back with Rachel Starwhither's host of the Inside Schizophrenia podcast. Oh, I agree. I agree. But of course, I feel like you can almost change that into a lot of things and be like, wow, woman with schizophrenia is teaching kindergartners. That's a bad idea. And I feel like you can switch that out because it's not the job. That's the red flag. It's the, oh, she has schizophrenia. Now of course, if we were to switch that with almost any other medical condition, you'd be like, well, that's just, you shouldn't say that. You know, all that person has cancer. They shouldn't be allowed to teach kindergartners. You'd be like, well, what? That doesn't make sense. Like, that's ridiculous. That person is ADHD. They can't be trusted with kindergartners. You'd be like, well, if anything, they're probably better with kindergartners. You know, it's really interesting that you bring up that schizophrenia is the issue. I remember you were in New York City and you were doing comedy. And you talked about how I live with bipolar disorder and, and while you didn't use my name on stage, which I, I feel would have just improved the act so much. But you said people with bipolar disorder, they look up other people with bipolar disorder and they get, they get cool celebrities. They get athletes. They, they get, you know, movie stars. And then, and I, I want to let you finish your own joke. You, you spun it around this gets a frendia. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you Google famous people with bipolar, you get all these sexy people and like, these actors and they're so cool and they're always the edgy ones and you Google, you know, famous people with schizophrenia and you get top 10 worst serial killers of all time and you're like, oh God, oh God. Never mind. And you like, you know, redo it and say, okay, famous people with schizophrenia who didn't eat people Google and you get married Todd Lincoln. I mean, that's nice. That's it. You got to go all the way back to the 16th president of the United States. Yeah. And it's like, okay, I don't really, I mean, she's famous for being married. She's just kind of a historical figure. But it's like, okay, we don't get really any sexy people. They don't get Rachel. They don't, they don't, they don't get Rachel star withers. No. No, we don't get, no, we get serial killers and, you know, good old Mary Todd. How does that impact you? I mean, I, I, what's it like for you? Do you, do you have some examples of successful people with schizophrenia that you can keep in your back pocket? There are obviously people out there. And I think for me, the most interesting ones are the doctors, the psychiatrists, the people who have schizophrenia and are like, I want to find out why. I want to find out what not only makes other people tick, but me. So I have a lot of people like that. And we talked about the podcast. I get to interview other people with schizophrenia. And it's crazy. The people I've got to meet that have schizophrenia that you of course would never in a million years know who are doing these incredible jobs who are writers, who are college professors, who work in all these different amazing fields. And you would never know they have schizophrenia. And when you realize the fact that one in 100 people have schizophrenia, that's actually a lot. Right away, we can all think about being in settings like at Walmart and you've been around to say at least 100 people in that Walmart. I'm like, okay, that means at least one person with schizophrenia, mathematically is in here with me. But no one is screaming or crying in the corner. Everybody's just the same. Well, yeah, you go out in public all the time. I want everybody to know going out in public with Rachel is incredible, but it's not incredible because of the schizophrenia. It's incredible because of the you. And nobody recognizes it. When I talk about working with Rachel, they're always drawn to the modeling. They're drawn to your style. They're drawn to you being in Marvel movies. And then I'm like, well, we host this show called Inside Schizophrenia. And they're like, well, what's her connection there? I'm like, well, she lives in schizophrenia. And they're like, no, really? It's almost a footnote in your story except that it's ever present in your life. I would say most people around me have no idea. I have schizophrenia unless I tell them. And I am very lucky and privileged because I'm able to talk about it in a way that I don't think anyone else should have to. If you want to share that you have a mental disorder, it is 100% up to you. You should not feel like, oh, hey, I need to go out and broadcast this because Rachel does. I talk about it because my whole goal is that if I talk about it and people are like, oh, hey, wow, she's really normal-ish. She's not what I expected with movies and TV shows that then when they meet someone else in life who has schizophrenia or they're worried that they themselves might have schizophrenia, they're like, hey, okay, I know Rachel's on medication. I know Rachel sees it there. I guess it's okay for me to go. I guess it's okay for my child for me to look into getting help from my child. It's not going to be the end of the world. They're not going to be ostracized or they're not going to shurn out to be a serial killer or they're not going to blah, blah, blah. I think that is remarkable for people to be able to look up to you and know this, but that does mean that you have to tell them because they can't just look at you and be like, oh, well, there's Rachel, the schizophrenic. And in fact, I think if somebody said there's Rachel, the schizophrenic, you should rightly be offended. I should be at this point like I'm like, well, obviously it is. It's not a good attitude about it, but yeah. How did you become so open? I mean, really, you're very open about living with schizophrenia. You've got a very popular YouTube channel about it. You tell everybody you host a very popular podcast. It's a huge thing that you built. Did that take some work to decide to be that open and that out there? I did. I was already working in media, making these crazy stunt videos. I had been on some TV shows and I decided one day I was like, you know what? I want to make a video about the other stuff going on, not just the silly goofy side of me. So I made this video called normal living with schizophrenia. It's super old now and it's very cringe. I can't stand even watching clips of it because I don't know. I'm early 20s in it. So I'm making such a big deal, which is hilarious because now if I could go back and talk to my younger self, I'd be like, what are you whining about? Oh my god, it's going to get so much worse. That was nothing. But yeah, back then it was like life or death to me. So I'm super serious in the video. And now I'm like, oh gosh, we'll get over yourself. You're fine. But that was, yeah, it was a big deal back then and my mom was terrified. She's like, Rachel, what's people know you're never going to work again? Like she was super, this was pre-tick-talk, you know, where people just tell everything. She was like, no, your life is going to be over. I made the video and people started reaching out and being like, oh my god, I go through this exact same thing. And that was what I wanted. As I wanted other people like me to know, hey, if you're not alone, here's someone who's not scary who has schizophrenia. And it's pretty amazing because now you have tick-tock, you have Instagram, you have all these social media and people openly starting the videos with, hey, I have schizophrenia. And I love how far the world's come in such a short time. And I feel that you were on the front lines of making that happen. Not you alone, but people like you 20 years ago who took the risk to say, hello, my name is, and I live with. You set the tone. You helped make the world the better place that it is today. Rachel, thank you so much for being here. Thank you for your candor. Thank you for your openness. Thank you for your honesty. I very much enjoy working with you and I appreciate all you do to dispel the stigma and myths surrounding schizophrenia. I hope people check out your podcast. You will hear it from your voice. I am the co-host over there, but you'll mostly hear from Rachel and her amazing guests. Rachel, my very, very last question. And I promise I'll let you go. What do you have to say for the caregivers, the family members, the friends, the support teams, the people who are out there, and they're like, look, we don't know what to do. We want our loved ones to be like Rachel. We want them to be badasses. We want them to thrive. We want them to lead a great life. And they feel like they're flailing. Can you speak to that group for a moment? Absolutely. Because yesterday I was failing and flailing. Don't think that this is me 100% of the time. It's not. We're all on individual journeys and it isn't every day situation. And if I have to be hospitalized tomorrow, then that's the reality of it. And that's fine. I think getting treatment, whether you're talking about therapy, hospitalization, medication, that is the bravest thing you can do. As a caregiver, the best thing many times is just to be a support and help those with schizophrenia. Hey, look, there are other options. Let's talk about them. Help them find those other options. Someone the other day was reaching out to me and said, Rachel, I need help. I'm scared. I don't want to be hospitalized again. And I said, well, what you're probably talking about is inpatient. So let's first of all, let's see what options you have other than inpatient. Now inpatient is still on the table. Sometimes there's half day options. There's going to see a certain light counselor, like let's talk about it as a caregiver. A lot of times I hear that people in their lives with schizophrenia, they're afraid of a certain medication, like, okay, it doesn't have to be all or nothing. Let's see what other treatment and options there are and just be supportive. Rachel, your podcast insights gets a friend is available on your favorite podcast player or you can go to psychcentral.com slash. I.S. Where can folks find you online? Rachel Star Live is pretty much my handle on things, YouTube, Instagram, Facebook and RachelStarLive.com. And it is Rachel Star STA R with 1R. If you got, listen to this, you are hoping you got the porn star. There's a very popular porn star with the same name. Unfortunately, I am not her. That would have been a completely different interview game. Rachel, again, thank you so much for your time. No problem. Thank you so much, Gabe. And thank you very much to the listeners out there. I'll Rachel, you are very, very welcome. And thank you for thanking our listeners for me. My name is Gabe Howard and I am an award-winning public speaker who could be available for your next event. I also wrote the book Mental Owners as an Asshole and other observations, which is on Amazon. However, you can grab a signed copy with free show swag or learn more about me by heading over to Gabe Howard.com. You can also follow me on Instagram and TikTok and ask a bipolar. Now I have a favor. Wherever you downloaded this episode, please follow or subscribe to the show. It is absolutely free to do so. And here's another favor. Recommend the show. Share us in a support group. Share your favorite episode on social media. Send somebody a text message or an email because sharing the show with the people you know is how we're going to grow. I will see everybody next time on Inside Mental Health. You've been listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast from Healthline Media. Have a topic or guest suggestion? Email us at show at psychcentral.com. Previous episodes can be found at psychcentral.com slash show or on your favorite podcast player. Thank you for listening. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with cornbreadhemp.com. Are you looking for an alternative to melatonin that will help you get the best night sleep that you've been dreaming about? Then look no further than cornbread hemp CBD sleep gummies. These gummies are packed with cornbread signature CBD extracts alongside natural botanicals like lavender, chamomile and valerian root to help you fall asleep and stay asleep. They are USDA certified organic and cornbread never uses any artificial ingredients, harsh solvents or synthetics. Use coupon code inside 30 and get 30% off your first order. Just go to cornbreadhemp.com. That coupon code again is inside 30, the website cornbreadhemp.com.