 I had the same misconceptions about OCD that most people had, where you think, oh, it's just being afraid of germs or being super tidy, I'm the messiest person there is. So, you know, it didn't make sense to me at first. You're listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast where experts share experiences and the latest thinking on mental health and psychology. Here's your host, Gabe Howard. Hey everyone, welcome to the show. I'm your host, Gabe Howard. Call in into the podcast today. We have Sam Temple, Sam as an artist, designer, and producer in the YouTube industry for the H3 show. She has someone who lives with obsessive-compulsive disorder and OCD advocacy has become a huge part of her life. Sam, welcome to the podcast. Thank you for having me. This is so exciting. Oh, it is exciting for me too. Before we jump in, I want to give a great big shout out to NoCD. They are the sponsor of this episode. You can learn more by going to NoCD.com or treatmyocd.com. Now, Sam, I was really surprised to learn that it takes on average 14 to 17 years to be diagnosed with OCD. How long did it take you to get a diagnosis? 22 years. Oh, wow. Wow. You're on the other side of the average. Yeah. And when I got diagnosed so much of my life made sense in retrospect, I was like, oh, that's what that was. Oh, okay. Okay. So, lots of learning happened as soon as I kind of knew what was going on with my brain. When you say going wrong with your brain, what are some examples of that for our listeners? Well, the intrusive thoughts, number one, I thought that these were my real thoughts, my real feelings, like, oh, I'm thinking about hurting myself. I must want to hurt myself. I'm thinking about, what if I used to have this one when I was young where I would say, what if I don't love my cat anymore? And it would just, it would cause me so much distress and I would just get in this loop. And every time I would see my cat, I'd be like, oh, there's that cat you don't love. And I would be like, no, it's not true. So I just kind of noticed that I would get stuck in thought patterns and loops that would cause me really extreme anxiety and distress. And these thoughts did not align with my values. They did not align with what I knew about myself. And I thought that was weird. That was really alarming. And it just got worse and worse. Before you went for treatment, what was your life like? I mean, you've described some of it, but overall, was this a hindrance? Were you able to work? How, how, how debilitating was this? It was really awful. I think all the time, like, how was I functioning? I don't know how I was getting out of bed. Um, yes, it was definitely a hindrance. It was, it was preventing me from, I would say no to pretty much any plan. I didn't want to leave the house. I wanted to stay just within familiarity in my comfort zone. What I knew was safe. I didn't want to do anything. And actually, the only time that I felt somewhat normal was when I was working. But your brain is not designed to be working all the time. I deserve to be able to relax. And I wanted to train myself to be able to relax. Um, but yeah, it was just, I was work, work, working and just trying to prevent a thought from occurring all the time. And that's, that's not the way to live. Before your diagnosis, were you ever able to relax or was it just non-stop? No, I, not really. Um, I always told myself I was doing active rest. So I would never just, I was, I was unable to watch a TV show is what I explained to people all the time. I could not watch a movie. Anything that required me to sit in one place and focus on something for the, for just pure enjoyment could not do that because my mind would just wander. And I would just start to get obsessive because the way my brain is set up is if you're not worrying about something, something's wrong. You should always be on guard. What made you realize this? I just kind of realized, as I got older, it just became more and more of a hindrance. And I was like, I shouldn't be feeling like adrenaline releasing all day long. I shouldn't be on edge all the time. And then it was, like the, the intrusive thoughts that I was having were getting scarier and scarier. And I was like, this, I need to do something about this because especially with OCD, a lot of times I can't tell the difference between like a thought that's intrusive and a thought that's not. And because OCD is kind of the doubting disorder, I'm constantly doubting myself. I'm like, no, you do feel that way. No, you really do feel that way. And that's not true. I've never heard OCD refer to as the doubting disorder before. Can you expand on that a little bit because that's fascinating to me? Well, it just causes you to doubt everything. So you doubt all of your values and your beliefs and you think that these intrusive thoughts are what you believe because especially when I was younger, I would think, oh, I'm thinking it. So I must be feeling it. I'm thinking this. So this must be me. And it's like, no, you can't control your thoughts. You can only control how you react. So that was a huge learning curve. In some ways, it sounds a little bit like anxiety treatment. I live with anxiety and bipolar disorder. So I do not have OCD. I want to be very clear with the audience and with you Sam. But you know, with anxiety, these things just pop in your head. You have anxiety attacks, panic attacks. And you're just, you're just like, well, why do I believe this? And you're right. We can't control our thoughts. But the treatment for many people with anxiety is, you know, you can think it. You can feel it, but you don't have to react to it. I'm just curious though, how can you tell the difference then between anxiety and OCD? Because I believe you've described that you have some anxiety as well. Or is that just part and parcel of the OCD? It both. I think I have anxiety outside of OCD, but I think most of my anxiety stems from my OCD. The difference with OCD is the level of distress that these thoughts cause and the frequency. So if it's normal anxiety, I might be like, oh, I'm really, I'm really nervous about this presentation that I have to give it work today. That is an anxiety that I can separate from, oh my gosh, what if I drive my car off a cliff? What if I want to do that? And that's a thought that cycles in my mind 50 times a day. And I'm getting like, I'm having panic symptoms because of that thought. So yeah, with OCD, it's just the intensity and the frequency that is different from normal anxiety. But I was told throughout my whole life that what I was experiencing was just anxiety. And I just thought, oh my God, well, I must have the worst case of anxiety that there is. But being told over and over that, oh, that's just anxiety was kind of isolating for me. Because I thought no one has it this bad. No one is as bad as me. People, I have friends that say they have anxiety that are not doing this. So I didn't start to feel less alone in my diagnosis until I got out of talk therapy and into exposure and response prevention therapy with no CD. And what led you there? What was the turning point? I know you were 22 years old and you just decided, hey, this must not be anxiety. This must be something more serious. How were you able to finally get that diagnosis? So I went to my psychiatrist and I was so afraid of medication petrified because my big, big theme, especially at that time and in my adolescence was health anxiety. And I grew up with a family that didn't really believe in psychiatric medication. And I, it was very stigmatized for me, especially where I grew up in the South. It was just kind of a, why would you do that? So I just got to this point where I was like, I have to do something. I can't be like this every day. It's affecting my creativity, which is my biggest value. It's keeping me from, like I said, I didn't want to leave the house. So I went to my psychiatrist and she said this kind of sounds like OCD. And I was like, oh, I don't, I don't wash my hands a lot. I'm not a really tidy person. And she was like, no, there's way, there's way more types of OCD. So she referred me out to no CD and I, my journey kind of started there. One of the things that I learned about OCD is that you can be messy and have OCD. And I thought, well, how can that be? Whenever anybody is super organized, they have OCD. Like that's the, that's the phrase that is thrown at you. You can't just be organized. If you're organized, clean, tidy, you have OCD. That's what everybody says. And nothing that you've described so far sounds anything like that. Yeah, not at all. That's a theme that I've actually never experienced. There's so many different themes and subtypes of OCD that I have never experienced. But yeah, most people do think it has to do with cleanliness. But I'm like, no, you guys don't understand. If the next car that drives by is why I'm going to jump off a bridge tomorrow, that's the type of OCD I'm dealing with. Wow. Yeah, there's so, there's just so many different subtypes. Like relationship OCD is another one that I experience sort of throughout high school and middle school. I ended every single relationship that I had. And even a little bit in college, just because I would get so hyper focused on intrusive thoughts that I was having about this person where I'd be like, you're going to mess their wife up. You're going to break their heart. You are going to be the reason why they're traumatized. You're going to send them to therapy. These are all things that I was kind of telling myself. Yeah, it's been a long road. You said relationship OCD. And while you were talking, I was fascinated by this idea that you were breaking up with people for their own good because of those obsessive thoughts. Is relationship OCD an actual subcategory of OCD? Yes, it is. It's a pretty popular one. A lot of people experience relationship OCD. And I will say I don't personally experience it anymore. I've been in a five year long, very stable, healthy relationship. But it was definitely difficult when I had to end things with someone because I would be like, I would have to just make up other excuses because I can't tell someone like, hey, I have to break up with you because 25 times a day, I think of it. It's about how I'm going to traumatize you or how I'm going to ruin your life. And I cannot do that to you so I need to remove myself from the situation. There's no way you can tell someone that doesn't have OCD or like a concept of an anxiety disorder. So it was very, very difficult. But I didn't understand what was happening to me at that time. I didn't know. I thought that was my thoughts. I thought those were my feelings. It's not. The OCD was definitely very loud during that time. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with Cornbread Hemp. Cornbread hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flour only, full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten free. They come in a wide variety of flavors, another perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Lissiders can save 30% off their first order at cornbreadhemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. That's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbreadhemp.com. Gabe Howard here to tell you about the inside bipolar podcast from Healthline Media. He does the show with me, Dr. Nicole Washington, aboard certified psychiatrist. That's right, a guy living with bipolar and a psychiatrist team up to discuss living well with bipolar disorders. Listen now on your favorite podcast player or visit psychcentral.com slash IBP to learn more. Subscribe now so you don't miss out. And we're back with Sam Temple who is talking about her journey with obsessive compulsive disorder. I know you mentioned talk therapy, but had you tried any other forms of treatment before the ERP with no CD? No, I had mostly just done talk therapy and I had been in and out of talk therapy for most of my life and I was always wondering like why am I not getting better? Something's not working and then that sort of further the belief that like something is wrong with me, I have an unfixable case of anxiety. So it really wasn't until I started doing exposure and response prevention with no CD that I was like, oh, I've actually just been seeking reassurance from a therapist for the last like 15 years and that is counterproductive to OCD. Seeking reassurance, not going to help you at all. So yeah, exposure therapy, I can't speak highly of it enough, ERP. I cannot speak highly of that enough. It is fantastic. I have to admit in the very beginning, I was like, how is this going to help me? I don't get it. How is this going to help me? But it started helping so quickly and I was like, wait, the things that I originally went to no CD for and started doing ERP for, I haven't thought about those things in like two months and it's like, oh, that's like tremendous. Can you walk us through what ERP therapy is like a typical session for you, for our audience members who have heard of it, but have never known anybody to have tried it? Yes. So the way that no CD does this, you will develop a fear and response list with your therapist. So you will kind of work with your therapist to organize all of your fears and obsessions and then what are the behaviors that you do because of these fears and obsessions? And then you work with your therapist to create exposures that are kind of leveled. So there will be easier exposures than you work up sort of to more difficult exposures, but the more that you expose yourself to these fears, the easier and easier it gets, you're just training your brain to understand that this thought or this action or this feeling or whatever is not a threat. But I can't, it just works. It just works. That's where I love that it just works. I'm thinking of Indiana Jones. Indiana Jones is afraid of snakes. And in one of the movies, he talked about exposure to snakes, the more he saw snakes, the more that he still didn't like them, but he just sort of became desensitized to them. Now I know that Indiana Jones is a fictional character and this is a movie and I'm not suggesting that pop culture is where we should get our medical advice. Is that a decent analogy for how ERP from the works? Yeah, ERP in the beginning is difficult because it's a process that you kind of, it's unfamiliar and you have to get acclimated to, I mean, it can be uncomfortable. You're exposing yourself to like huge fears and just very like deeply rooted things that you are really trying to not think about all day long. But the more it's just building little by little, it just truly just chips away at the severity and it's just extremely helpful. I love that it's extremely helpful. What drew you over to no CD because of course you can get ERP from other providers but you like no CD's ERP? Yes, I was recommended to no CD by my psychiatrist. It was something that was covered under my insurance and I was like, wait, there's like an actual specialized thing for OCD and it's super easy, super convenient. I love my therapist over there. It gave me so much hope that there was something that was specialized for what was going on with me and it wasn't talk therapy because I expected going into that psychiatry appointment being like, okay, they're going to refer me to another therapist and then I'm going to start the routine over again because I was thinking maybe my therapist is not good or maybe it's me or something like that. So I was fully expecting to be put back into kind of like a process where I have to start from square one again but I have not started from square one in many years and it feels really good. So did your psychiatrist diagnose you with OCD and then refer you to no CD for treatment? Is that the order of events? Yes, yes. And so clearly your psychiatrist believes in no CD as well. Now I'm curious, I know that the no CD therapist have to go through just a tremendous amount of training. Did that matter to you? Did that factor in? It did. Yeah, I really wanted someone who was qualified for OCD because in especially knowing what I, everything I know now about OCD, it definitely does take special training and understanding of how the OCD brain works. I mean, it's, it's worked wonders for me. So I definitely believe in that process very much. It's important to point out to our listeners that there's no cure for OCD. So even as we're talking Sam, you still have OCD. Do you consider yourself to be in recovery? What were you to use to describe your life now other than it's better now? OCD, it's, it's a journey. I would say that I am in recovery right now. Obviously, it's not going, it's not a curable condition. It's not going to magically go away. I'm fortunate to have times where it's, the volume is turned down on it in my head a little more. And sometimes it's turned way up. So what's helpful though is that when it's turned way up, I'm a little more in control and able to turn it down myself. That's what ERP has brought me. So it's a journey, it's a process. And it's one that you probably have to work on every day. You're never going to be able to just forget about OCD. It's a part of your life. Yeah, yeah. What helps me, I mean, advocacy means so much to me. And being able to talk about it has brought me, I feel so much less alone and just getting messages from people that are like, I had no idea what was going on with me until I listen to you talk about it or something like that. I'm like, I needed that. I needed to, I needed people to talk about it. I needed to, I needed people to relate to in the beginning of my journey. And it's important to me that I can provide that to other people. That's incredible. You mentioned that people reach out to you and what advice do you have for the newly diagnosed? Just give us all your advice on OCD. I would say to those who are early in their journey, seek out community, seek out other people that have OCD. I would stay off of forums, do not Google, in my case, Googling conditions was horrendous for me. And obviously, I would definitely give no CD a shot. I mean, it was just so tremendously helpful and still continues to be tremendously helpful for me. But definitely speak to a psychiatrist and find some options that work best for you. OCD is different for everyone. And it can be very isolating. So talking about it and seeking help is extremely important and it will change your life if you can do that. Sam, we're almost at a time. But I wanted to ask you, is there anything that you're grateful for on your OCD journey? As hard as it has been, I am so grateful that I found proper care and being able to help other people is such a core value of mine. So I am so thrilled anytime I am given the space to talk about this and hopefully help other people. It was so, I can't even explain how scary it was in the beginning to not know what's going on with yourself, but being able to learn and be around so many advocates and be able to express my feelings freely. I'm so tremendously grateful for that. I'm just to be clear, you're still using no CD and it's still showing results. Yes, 100%. Practicing every day, I have homework every day. And it's great. That is awesome. You talk about having homework every day and doing something every day to manage your OCD. How much time does that take you compared to how much time OCD was eating up? The time it takes me to do my homework every day with no CD is beyond worth it compared to how much OCD has taken away from me. So I have no problem spending 30 minutes to an hour every day that is putting me like months ahead compared to what I was going through. It is a labor of love. That is a great way of looking at it. Now for our listeners, where can they find no CD? You can download no CD from the app store and yeah, you can get started. You can also go to treatmyocd.com or nocd.com and check them out there. They have lots of testimonials from really cool people like Sam Temple. Sam, thank you so much for being on the podcast. Thank you so much. This was so awesome. I really appreciate it. Well you are very welcome, Sam. I want to give a great big thank you to all of our listeners. My name is Gabe Howard and I am an award-winning public speaker who could be available for your next event. I also wrote the book Mental Illness is an Asshole and other observations which you can get on Amazon. However, you can grab a signed copy with free show swag or learn more about me by heading over to my website GabeHoward.com. You can also follow me on Instagram or TikTok at Ask a Bipolar. Wherever you download this episode, please follow or subscribe to the show. It is absolutely free and you don't want to miss a thing. And hey can you do me a favor? Recommend the show. Share us on social media. Share us in a support group. Send somebody a text message sharing the show with the people you know is how we grow. I will see everybody next Thursday on Inside Mental Health. You've been listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast from Healthline Media. Have a topic or guest suggestion? Email us at show at psychcentral.com. Any of the episodes can be found at psychcentral.com slash show or on your favorite podcast player. Thank you for listening. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with Cornbread Hemp. Cornbread Hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flour only, full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten free. They come in a wide variety of flavors and other perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Licitors can save 30% off their first order at cornbreadhemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. It's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbreadhemp.com.