 I think that Barry Goldwater was really the first notable public figure to be affected by that issue and that's why the American Psychiatric Association responded in the way that they did. We don't want somebody to lose their job, lose their livelihood over what is speculation on the part of a professional because again it's just your public persona and your public behavior that's being judged. They weren't actually seen by these medical professionals and in that way they're not supposed to diagnose anyway. You're listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast where experts share experiences and the latest thinking on mental health and psychology. Here's your host Gabe Howard. Hey everybody, welcome to the show. I'm your host Gabe Howard. This podcast is sponsored by cornbreadhemp.com. Save 30% on your first order using code inside 30. I want to welcome back senior editor for Healthline Media or Rachel Beersdow. As a health editor she manages the creation of content that publishes on Healthline.com. She has a background in biology and helps us cover a huge range of health conditions from general wellness to niche chronic conditions. Rachel, welcome back to the show. Thanks Gabe, thanks for the warm welcome. It's good to be back. Good to see you. I am so glad that you're back because back in July you came on the show to discuss out of bounds questions that listeners were asking about mental health on our website. Now, listeners loved that show so we get to do it again. Rachel, what question are we tackling this time? So we had a lot of great questions to choose from this round but one that we felt was a good one for us to cover this episode is why won't any mental health professional diagnose a US presidential candidate as mentally ill? What is the American Medical Association waiting for? Can't doctors tell us when they know a presidential candidate is crazy? So there's a lot to unpack there but that's sort of why we felt like we should talk about it today. Any initial thoughts on that game? My first initial thought is that all of our listeners who lean Democrat are going to be like why didn't they say this about the Republican nominee? And all of our listeners who lean Republican are like, aha, why didn't they say this about the Democratic nominee? And I think really that's the answer to the question. The reason that they can't do it is because there is a subjectiveness in this. There really is a lot to unpack. There's many, many, many reasons that psychiatrists and mental health professionals are not going to publicly comment on the mental health of a political candidate. There's two that we want to cover though. One is boring. You can't diagnose somebody based on their public persona, right? You can't treat a patient that you're not actually treating. So it would be wholly irresponsible to say, oh, I saw somebody in public. I did not work with them directly. I just observed them from a distance. Ask them no questions. Did no cognitive testing nothing? I just simply watched them on TV and now I've decided that they have a mental illness. That's just not how any of this works. But interestingly enough, all the way back in 1964, psychiatrists and mental health professionals did do this. They did this to a candidate who was running for president named Barry Goldwater, where they decided that he had a mental illness and they publicly spoke on it and it tanked his political career and it was completely untrue. The man had no mental illness to speak of, at least none that ever came out publicly. So in 1973, the American Psychiatric Association decided to put in formal rules that just said, hey, you're not allowed to do this. You're not allowed to comment on it. It creates way too many problems. It's unprofessional. It's unethical. And ever since then, the Goldwater rule has been in place. So the easiest answer to the question, Rachel, is because they're not allowed. They're not allowed to do it. Yeah. What happened was when Barry Goldwater was running for president in the 1964 presidential election, there was a magazine called Fact Magazine that created an informal survey and they conducted it only a week after he received the nomination for the Republican Party for president. And basically, they said that they distributed a questionnaire to over 12,000 psychiatrists in the US and around 2400 people responded. And the majority of them deemed him unfit for office. So 1189 deemed him unfit for office. 657 stated that they believed him to be mentally fit and well enough for office. And then 571 said that they did not know enough about him to answer the question objectively, which I think is really interesting that the, I guess the majority, if they did actually send it out to 12,000 psychiatrists, didn't respond. But of those who did respond, the fewest number said that they didn't know enough. So I think that that is really interesting because obviously at the time, without that rule put in place by their professional organization, people did feel empowered to weigh in on the mental state of a presidential candidate. And this is back in 1964 when, if you think about it now, we have way more access, you could say, or at least exposure to political candidates. You know, their inner thoughts, people tweeting 24 or 7. We just, I think we know more about candidates, so we did in 1964, so I think it's an interesting contrast. It's interesting that you pointed out how little access they had in 1964, because for example, for the vast majority of people, anything that they saw from a political candidate in 1964, was filtered at least once, because it had to be on the television news, it had to be written by a reporter. You didn't literally have access directly to the candidate without there being a middleman. And yet, people still felt that they could weigh in. They felt like they had enough information to weigh in. Now this has created a little bit of a controversy, because now they're saying, hey, look, maybe the goldwater rule should expire. Maybe it's ran its course, because now we can see firsthand from presidential candidates, because we have things like social media. We have things like the internet where, yeah, maybe they'll play a 30-second clip on the news, but they'll let you see the its speech and its entirety on their website. So now somebody doesn't just have to worry about the sound bites. Somebody could literally examine the whole speech from the second the candidate walks on stage to the second the candidate walks off, and can go look at their own social media and see the things that they are tweeting, the things that they are putting on Facebook, TikTok, Instagram, their own videos, etc. So now mental health professionals are starting to say, hey, look, we're not relying on third-party information anymore. We're staring right at the candidate who is acting erratically, who is behaving in ways that we think are unfit, and the public has a right to know our findings. I think that probably the biggest reason that this rule was put into place is because, you know, I don't think that Barry Goldwater was ever known to be diagnosed with any mental health condition, right? So I think his public persona was grandiose, and he had really strong opinions on things, which is why people had a very strong reaction to his candidacy, but that said it doesn't mean that his public persona was who he was as an individual and as a person. Now one could make the argument that he chose that public persona. Absolutely. People choose public personas for all kinds of reasons. Exactly. Look at Larry the cable guy, right? I don't think he dresses that way in real life. If we go back further, George Burns, George Burns always performed holding a cigar, but he actually stopped smoking decades before. It was just an iconic part of his acts. We have comedians who pretend to be drunk and drink apple cider, but pretend that it's vodka or whiskey. So your public persona is just that. It's created to advance your public career. It's an amazing thing. I think that the gold water rule itself helps to block that stigma or the perpetuation of stigma at least for people living with mental health challenges. Because I mean, you know this, living with bipolar disorder, sometimes conditions take years to get right and to get the right diagnosis for it. That sort of off-handed opinion can mean real stigma is then spread throughout anyone who's listening to that opinion. So I get why that would be a concern. I think it's a really good point that you bring up, Rachel, that they only want you to say negative things. Nobody ever asks a psychiatrist to come on and defend it like, hey, can people with bipolar disorder, major depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, psychosis, whatever, any mental health issue? Is that person a quality person who is capable of doing things? And then the psychiatrist gives all the reasons that people who have suffered from a mental health crisis or who live with a diagnosable mental illness contribute to society in extraordinarily meaningful ways. It's always a pejorative. It's always a negative. Come on, tell me that that person's crazy so that people won't vote for them, support them or like them. So yeah, it really does create the idea that having the mental illness makes you bad. It's never delivered compassionately or kindly. It's not, oh, that's too bad. Barry Goldwater would have been an excellent president if it wasn't for this illness that he had. It's so set. No, it's always unfit to be president. He's crazy. He's nuts. There was zero compassion for the man, even though these were medical professionals who were weighing in on whether or not he was sick. And yet, all they cared about was tanking his career. And it's utterly fascinating to me. And another reason that I think the rule really needs to be in place. It's really designed to prevent harm. I think this is a good place to bring in our second question, which someone did write in directly about the Goldwater Rule. They asked, can you cover the Goldwater Rule? Perhaps it needs to be repealed. And I will start with the fact that it's not actually a legal rule that exists, right? It's not illegal for people who psychiatrists specifically to comment on someone publicly. The American Psychiatric Association has deemed that it's unethical and that there might be consequences. So they might be kicked out of that professional organization. But it also only applies to psychiatrists who are members of the APA. In general, the field, I think, accepts the rule. There is some criticism of it. And I think it would be interesting for us to talk about some of those gray areas and critiques of it as well. It's really interesting how that's been framed, Rachel, because if you go all the way back to the first debate, the one against President Biden and President Trump, a lot of medical professionals weighed in on the cognitive abilities of Joe Biden. And people weighed in on what can we expect in the aging process of Joe Biden, because he would have been the oldest president to be reelected, had he decided to stay in the race. And we saw all of this commentary play out well within the public domain, and ultimately President Biden decided to drop out of the race. And we step into the new race, and suddenly all that commentary dried up. There was no commentary about President Trump's cognitive abilities, nobody weighed in on his erratic behavior, his late night social media posts, or anything like that. And people started asking questions, hey, listen to this speech. Is that coherent? Does somebody who sounds like this? Are they okay? And then professional said, we can't weigh in because of the goldwater rule. And I think the public was like, well, wait a minute, we literally chased another man off the ballot because of medical opinion and society being concerned that he was not fit to be president physically. And now we're asking the same questions about this next guy, and suddenly you can't say a word. And I think that's why people are writing in. I think that's why people are so fascinated like, wait a minute, why are we not having medical and professional commentary about President Trump in the same way that we had medical and professional commentary about Joe Biden? And I think that's a very relevant question. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with Cornbread Hemp. Cornbread Hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flour only, full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten free. They come in a wide variety of flavors, another perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Lissiders can save 30% off their first order at cornbreadhemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. That's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbreadhemp.com. Gabe Howard here to tell you about the inside bipolar podcast from Healthline Media. He does the show with me, Dr. Nicole Washington, a board certified psychiatrist. That's right, a guy living with bipolar and a psychiatrist team up to discuss living well with bipolar disorder. Listen now on your favorite podcast player or visit psychcentral.com slash IBP to learn more. I'm now so you don't miss out. There's a quote that I pulled from an article in the Lancet which was published in March 2024 when Joe Biden was still the presidential nominee for the Democratic Party. So I'll read it quickly. Akin to fake news in past elections. Deep fakes of Mr. Biden exhibiting signs of cognitive decline have already captured news headlines. These could shape post-truth messaging and voter sentiment. Thus in the 2024 cycle, psychiatrists will need to balance ethical obligations alongside public demands for scientific insights, likely renewing tensions over the APA's gold water rule. Which I think is really interesting because obviously there is that thirst for expert commentary and I think even as an everyday citizen myself, I would want commentary from people who are the most qualified to be weighing in on these things. But I also see the point in having the gold water rule in place to ensure that there are certain protections for people in the public eye. I think have you heard of post-truth before? I've heard rumblings about this but can you explain it because we also want to make sure our listeners know. Yeah. It's not that I don't know Rachel. It's that I want to make sure that they know. Okay. You're so generous always. So I actually did look up a definition so I could share it with you and not you but most of the audience. But basically post-truth refers to a situation whereby facts have lost their currency in contemporary political and public debate. That's sort of what we're talking about with the gold water rule. So the concept of post-truth is not so much used to suggest that truth does not exist but that facts have become secondary to our political point of view. So it's haunting to me in a way that this concept is becoming more and more relevant but I think that that's why people are resurfacing these critiques of the gold water rule and looking for the truth where it exists because more and more it seems like alternative facts and things that aren't true more so emotions are leading people into their like in their political lives and opinions. And I think that the question that we got is probably from someone who is seeking more of a truthful approach. It's really fascinating to me because on one hand I agree with this. You're saying hey look I want to seek out an expert opinion. If I could get people on the internet to do this I would be so happy. So when I hear you talk Rachel I'm like well yeah they just want a professional opinion. But I really do think that we need to keep the gold water rule in place because when it comes to politics doctors have biases too. Remember no mental illness has a definitive test. There's no blood test. There's no hair test. There's no nothing for this. So it's always going to be opinion and those opinions are always going to be made by humans who may have an agenda or even at the very least an unintentional bias. Yeah. And I think with the gold water rule the APA is asking its members to consider their roles as private citizens versus professionals and like professionals making commentary especially as separate things. They are saying that as a private citizen you can believe and act however you want but as professional you have a duty and these are the standards that we are holding you to. I want to dive right into the controversy and say that we had a presidential candidate whose behavior was extraordinarily erratic. The things that they lied about just kept coming up over and over and over again and were so easily disproved and unfortunately I'm not trying to get political but president Trump maintained it for four years that the election was stolen despite so much evidence to the contrary and people were asking psychiatrists and psychologists and mental health professionals very specific questions. Is that a delusion? Is somebody who repeats the same lie for four years straight in their quest for power? Is that person mentally unstable? These are very specific questions that the entire country was asking and we never got answers to those questions. Well I will also counter that with is it delusion or is it a political strategy? Is that morally right? I don't know but it also could be a political strategy. You're absolutely right Rachel I think it's important to point out that there is no law that says that you can't lie. Lying is perfectly legal and let's move it away from politics for a moment. There is nothing that says that you can't lie in your personal life. There's nothing that says that you can't cheat on a spouser in a relationship and then lie about it. There are no laws that prevent this. Let's look at websites out there like flat earth websites right that the world is round. That's a scientific fact we've known this for generations but we cannot shut these websites down. We cannot stop them from teaching that the earth is flat. We cannot stop a person from charging money to teach the earth is flat. This is all perfectly legal and politicians are essentially allowed to follow the same rules as all the flat earthers. Yes they are. And it can be a little scary at times. I think for our subject around the gold water rule especially though as it pertains to the study of mental health and moving that field forward I do think that the gold water rule in some respect existing makes sense but I understand where the critique is coming from because as we've said you know like people can lie there's not a perfect system for politics or for the public eye and I think there is a thirst for people with training to be weighing in on these things but as we discussed before there's also a little lot of potential harm that can be done with doing that in a way that is biased than a way that is not done thoughtfully or with any care so it's a big gray area isn't there. It is a lot and I can certainly understand especially in this past election cycle that we saw why people wanted more professional opinions and why they wanted to weigh in on it. As we're nearing the end of the show I do want to leave people with this thought. We have a supreme court right now that hasn't had a unanimous verdict on any controversial issue really in our lifetime. It always goes conservative judges, liberal judges, conservative judges, liberal judges and I always think to myself but they're all judges applying the identical laws. They're all reading from the same source material and coming up with something different and unfortunately mental health is like that as well. So I really do believe that even if you remove the gold water rule you would just either get an echo chamber meaning if you watch conservative news you would get a whole bunch of conservative psychiatrists and psychologists and mental health professionals who would say that the other person was crazy and if you watched more liberal news the reverse would be true. So if you were actually looking for unbiased information I don't know that you could find it. I think that both sides could find plenty of experts to prove that their opponent was unfit. And in that way we wouldn't have more clear information. We would just have more information that contradicted each other and it would devolve quickly. And I think the biggest fallout of this would be all of the Americans who were living with mental illness or who have suffered a mental health issue would be hearing about their conditions mixed in with politics and they would wonder how much of what their hearing applies to them. And I think the general public would start to wonder how much of what their hearing applies to the people who live in their communities. I think by and large politicians are going to be fine. Even if they lose the election they're largely protected and wealthy and they have other career aspirations and opportunities. But I think the average person living with a mental health condition or a mental illness when they hear these things I think it hurts them the most. And perhaps if that's the only reason to keep the gold water rule in place I think it's a very compelling one. I agree. Mike dropped game. Mike dropped game. Rachel thank you so much for being here. Thank you for having me back. It was a pleasure. Did you have fun? I did. I always do. I like it when you have fun. All right. Well, thank you so much for being here and a great big thank you to all of our listeners as well. My name is Gabe Howard and I'm an award winning public speaker who could be available for your next event. I also wrote the book Mental Owners as an asshole and other observations which you can get on Amazon. But don't get it there. Come to my website and get a signed copy and I'll give you some free show swag. That website is Gabe Howard dot com. Wherever you download this episode, please follow or subscribe to the show. It is absolutely free and you don't want to miss a thing. And hey, do us a favor. Recommend the show. Tell everybody you know sharing the show is how we're going to grow. We will see everybody next time inside mental health. You've been listening to Inside Mental Health, a psych central podcast from Healthline Media. Have a topic or guest suggestion? Email us at show at psychcentral.com. An obvious episode can be found at psychcentral.com slash show or on your favorite podcast player. Thank you for listening. Gabe Howard here to tell you why we are proud to partner with Cornbread Hemp. Cornbread hemp is based in Kentucky and they produce a wide variety of USDA certified organic CBD products. One of our favorites here at the podcast are their full spectrum CBD gummies. These gummies are made with their flower only full spectrum hemp extracts and are vegan and they are gluten free. They come in a wide variety of flavors and other perfect addition to your morning or nightly routine to help you achieve your mental health goals. Lissiders can save 30% off their first order at cornbread hemp.com by using coupon code inside 30. It's coupon code inside 30 to save 30% at cornbread hemp.com.